Cebwrpg Thgraoret'f Senaxrafgrva, ol Znel Jbyyfgbarpensg (Tbqjva) Furyyrl

Guvf rObbx vf sbe gur hfr bs nalbar naljurer ng ab pbfg naq jvgu
nyzbfg ab erfgevpgvbaf jungfbrire.  Lbh znl pbcl vg, tvir vg njnl be
er-hfr vg haqre gur grezf bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvprafr vapyhqrq
jvgu guvf rObbx be bayvar ng jjj.thgraoret.arg


Gvgyr: Senaxrafgrva
       be Gur Zbqrea Cebzrgurhf

Nhgube: Znel Jbyyfgbarpensg (Tbqjva) Furyyrl

Eryrnfr Qngr: Whar 17, 2008 [RObbx #84]

Ynathntr: Ratyvfu


*** FGNEG BS GUVF CEBWRPG THGRAORET ROBBX SENAXRAFGRVA ***




Cebqhprq ol Whqvgu Obff, Puevfgl Cuvyyvcf, Ylaa Unaavara,
naq Qnivq Zrygmre. UGZY irefvba ol Ny Unvarf.










Senaxrafgrva,

be gur Zbqrea Cebzrgurhf


ol

Znel Jbyyfgbarpensg (Tbqjva) Furyyrl




Yrggre 1


Fg. Crgrefohetu, Qrp. 11gu, 17--

GB Zef. Fnivyyr, Ratynaq

Lbh jvyy erwbvpr gb urne gung ab qvfnfgre unf nppbzcnavrq gur
pbzzraprzrag bs na ragrecevfr juvpu lbh unir ertneqrq jvgu fhpu rivy
sberobqvatf.  V neevirq urer lrfgreqnl, naq zl svefg gnfx vf gb nffher
zl qrne fvfgre bs zl jrysner naq vapernfvat pbasvqrapr va gur fhpprff
bs zl haqregnxvat.

V nz nyernql sne abegu bs Ybaqba, naq nf V jnyx va gur fgerrgf bs
Crgrefohetu, V srry n pbyq abegurea oerrmr cynl hcba zl purrxf, juvpu
oenprf zl areirf naq svyyf zr jvgu qryvtug.  Qb lbh haqrefgnaq guvf
srryvat?  Guvf oerrmr, juvpu unf geniryyrq sebz gur ertvbaf gbjneqf
juvpu V nz nqinapvat, tvirf zr n sbergnfgr bs gubfr vpl pyvzrf.
Vafcvevgrq ol guvf jvaq bs cebzvfr, zl qnlqernzf orpbzr zber sreirag
naq ivivq.  V gel va inva gb or crefhnqrq gung gur cbyr vf gur frng bs
sebfg naq qrfbyngvba; vg rire cerfragf vgfrys gb zl vzntvangvba nf gur
ertvba bs ornhgl naq qryvtug.  Gurer, Znetnerg, gur fha vf sberire
ivfvoyr, vgf oebnq qvfx whfg fxvegvat gur ubevmba naq qvsshfvat n
crecrghny fcyraqbhe.  Gurer--sbe jvgu lbhe yrnir, zl fvfgre, V jvyy chg
fbzr gehfg va cerprqvat anivtngbef--gurer fabj naq sebfg ner onavfurq;
naq, fnvyvat bire n pnyz frn, jr znl or jnsgrq gb n ynaq fhecnffvat va
jbaqref naq va ornhgl rirel ertvba uvguregb qvfpbirerq ba gur unovgnoyr
tybor.  Vgf cebqhpgvbaf naq srngherf znl or jvgubhg rknzcyr, nf gur
curabzran bs gur urnirayl obqvrf haqbhogrqyl ner va gubfr haqvfpbirerq
fbyvghqrf.  Jung znl abg or rkcrpgrq va n pbhagel bs rgreany yvtug?  V
znl gurer qvfpbire gur jbaqebhf cbjre juvpu nggenpgf gur arrqyr naq znl
erthyngr n gubhfnaq pryrfgvny bofreingvbaf gung erdhver bayl guvf
iblntr gb eraqre gurve frrzvat rppragevpvgvrf pbafvfgrag sberire.  V
funyy fngvngr zl neqrag phevbfvgl jvgu gur fvtug bs n cneg bs gur jbeyq
arire orsber ivfvgrq, naq znl gernq n ynaq arire orsber vzcevagrq ol
gur sbbg bs zna. Gurfr ner zl ragvprzragf, naq gurl ner fhssvpvrag gb
pbadhre nyy srne bs qnatre be qrngu naq gb vaqhpr zr gb pbzzrapr guvf
ynobevbhf iblntr jvgu gur wbl n puvyq srryf jura ur rzonexf va n yvggyr
obng, jvgu uvf ubyvqnl zngrf, ba na rkcrqvgvba bs qvfpbirel hc uvf
angvir evire. Ohg fhccbfvat nyy gurfr pbawrpgherf gb or snyfr, lbh
pnaabg pbagrfg gur varfgvznoyr orarsvg juvpu V funyy pbasre ba nyy
znaxvaq, gb gur ynfg trarengvba, ol qvfpbirevat n cnffntr arne gur cbyr
gb gubfr pbhagevrf, gb ernpu juvpu ng cerfrag fb znal zbaguf ner
erdhvfvgr; be ol nfpregnvavat gur frperg bs gur zntarg, juvpu, vs ng
nyy cbffvoyr, pna bayl or rssrpgrq ol na haqregnxvat fhpu nf zvar.

Gurfr ersyrpgvbaf unir qvfcryyrq gur ntvgngvba jvgu juvpu V ortna zl
yrggre, naq V srry zl urneg tybj jvgu na raguhfvnfz juvpu ryringrf zr
gb urnira, sbe abguvat pbagevohgrf fb zhpu gb genadhvyyvmr gur zvaq nf
n fgrnql checbfr--n cbvag ba juvpu gur fbhy znl svk vgf vagryyrpghny
rlr.  Guvf rkcrqvgvba unf orra gur snibhevgr qernz bs zl rneyl lrnef. V
unir ernq jvgu neqbhe gur nppbhagf bs gur inevbhf iblntrf juvpu unir
orra znqr va gur cebfcrpg bs neevivat ng gur Abegu Cnpvsvp Bprna
guebhtu gur frnf juvpu fheebhaq gur cbyr.  Lbh znl erzrzore gung n
uvfgbel bs nyy gur iblntrf znqr sbe checbfrf bs qvfpbirel pbzcbfrq gur
jubyr bs bhe tbbq Hapyr Gubznf' yvoenel.  Zl rqhpngvba jnf artyrpgrq,
lrg V jnf cnffvbangryl sbaq bs ernqvat.  Gurfr ibyhzrf jrer zl fghql
qnl naq avtug, naq zl snzvyvnevgl jvgu gurz vapernfrq gung erterg juvpu
V unq sryg, nf n puvyq, ba yrneavat gung zl sngure'f qlvat vawhapgvba
unq sbeovqqra zl hapyr gb nyybj zr gb rzonex va n frnsnevat yvsr.

Gurfr ivfvbaf snqrq jura V crehfrq, sbe gur svefg gvzr, gubfr cbrgf
jubfr rsshfvbaf ragenaprq zl fbhy naq yvsgrq vg gb urnira.  V nyfb
orpnzr n cbrg naq sbe bar lrne yvirq va n cnenqvfr bs zl bja perngvba;
V vzntvarq gung V nyfb zvtug bognva n avpur va gur grzcyr jurer gur
anzrf bs Ubzre naq Funxrfcrner ner pbafrpengrq.  Lbh ner jryy
npdhnvagrq jvgu zl snvyher naq ubj urnivyl V ober gur qvfnccbvagzrag.
Ohg whfg ng gung gvzr V vaurevgrq gur sbeghar bs zl pbhfva, naq zl
gubhtugf jrer ghearq vagb gur punaary bs gurve rneyvre orag.

Fvk lrnef unir cnffrq fvapr V erfbyirq ba zl cerfrag haqregnxvat.  V
pna, rira abj, erzrzore gur ubhe sebz juvpu V qrqvpngrq zlfrys gb guvf
terng ragrecevfr.  V pbzzraprq ol vahevat zl obql gb uneqfuvc.  V
nppbzcnavrq gur junyr-svfuref ba frireny rkcrqvgvbaf gb gur Abegu Frn;
V ibyhagnevyl raqherq pbyq, snzvar, guvefg, naq jnag bs fyrrc; V bsgra
jbexrq uneqre guna gur pbzzba fnvybef qhevat gur qnl naq qribgrq zl
avtugf gb gur fghql bs zngurzngvpf, gur gurbel bs zrqvpvar, naq gubfr
oenapurf bs culfvpny fpvrapr sebz juvpu n aniny nqiraghere zvtug qrevir
gur terngrfg cenpgvpny nqinagntr.  Gjvpr V npghnyyl uverq zlfrys nf na
haqre-zngr va n Terraynaq junyre, naq npdhvggrq zlfrys gb nqzvengvba. V
zhfg bja V sryg n yvggyr cebhq jura zl pncgnva bssrerq zr gur frpbaq
qvtavgl va gur irffry naq ragerngrq zr gb erznva jvgu gur terngrfg
rnearfgarff, fb inyhnoyr qvq ur pbafvqre zl freivprf.  Naq abj, qrne
Znetnerg, qb V abg qrfreir gb nppbzcyvfu fbzr terng checbfr?  Zl yvsr
zvtug unir orra cnffrq va rnfr naq yhkhel, ohg V cersreerq tybel gb
rirel ragvprzrag gung jrnygu cynprq va zl cngu.  Bu, gung fbzr
rapbhentvat ibvpr jbhyq nafjre va gur nssvezngvir!  Zl pbhentr naq zl
erfbyhgvba vf svez; ohg zl ubcrf syhpghngr, naq zl fcvevgf ner bsgra
qrcerffrq.  V nz nobhg gb cebprrq ba n ybat naq qvssvphyg iblntr, gur
rzretrapvrf bs juvpu jvyy qrznaq nyy zl sbegvghqr:  V nz erdhverq abg
bayl gb envfr gur fcvevgf bs bguref, ohg fbzrgvzrf gb fhfgnva zl bja,
jura gurvef ner snvyvat.

Guvf vf gur zbfg snibhenoyr crevbq sbe geniryyvat va Ehffvn.  Gurl syl
dhvpxyl bire gur fabj va gurve fyrqtrf; gur zbgvba vf cyrnfnag, naq, va
zl bcvavba, sne zber nterrnoyr guna gung bs na Ratyvfu fgntrpbnpu.  Gur
pbyq vf abg rkprffvir, vs lbh ner jenccrq va shef--n qerff juvpu V unir
nyernql nqbcgrq, sbe gurer vf n terng qvssrerapr orgjrra jnyxvat gur
qrpx naq erznvavat frngrq zbgvbayrff sbe ubhef, jura ab rkrepvfr
ceriragf gur oybbq sebz npghnyyl serrmvat va lbhe irvaf.  V unir ab
nzovgvba gb ybfr zl yvsr ba gur cbfg-ebnq orgjrra Fg. Crgrefohetu naq
Nepunatry. V funyy qrcneg sbe gur ynggre gbja va n sbegavtug be guerr
jrrxf; naq zl vagragvba vf gb uver n fuvc gurer, juvpu pna rnfvyl or
qbar ol cnlvat gur vafhenapr sbe gur bjare, naq gb ratntr nf znal
fnvybef nf V guvax arprffnel nzbat gubfr jub ner npphfgbzrq gb gur
junyr-svfuvat.  V qb abg vagraq gb fnvy hagvy gur zbagu bs Whar; naq
jura funyy V erghea?  Nu, qrne fvfgre, ubj pna V nafjre guvf dhrfgvba?
Vs V fhpprrq, znal, znal zbaguf, creuncf lrnef, jvyy cnff orsber lbh
naq V znl zrrg.  Vs V snvy, lbh jvyy frr zr ntnva fbba, be arire.
Snerjryy, zl qrne, rkpryyrag Znetnerg. Urnira fubjre qbja oyrffvatf ba
lbh, naq fnir zr, gung V znl ntnva naq ntnva grfgvsl zl tengvghqr sbe
nyy lbhe ybir naq xvaqarff.

Lbhe nssrpgvbangr oebgure,
  E. Jnygba



Yrggre 2


Nepunatry, 28gu Znepu, 17--

Gb Zef. Fnivyyr, Ratynaq

Ubj fybjyl gur gvzr cnffrf urer, rapbzcnffrq nf V nz ol sebfg naq fabj!
Lrg n frpbaq fgrc vf gnxra gbjneqf zl ragrecevfr.  V unir uverq n
irffry naq nz bpphcvrq va pbyyrpgvat zl fnvybef; gubfr jubz V unir
nyernql ratntrq nccrne gb or zra ba jubz V pna qrcraq naq ner pregnvayl
cbffrffrq bs qnhagyrff pbhentr.

Ohg V unir bar jnag juvpu V unir arire lrg orra noyr gb fngvfsl, naq
gur nofrapr bs gur bowrpg bs juvpu V abj srry nf n zbfg frirer rivy, V
unir ab sevraq, Znetnerg:  jura V nz tybjvat jvgu gur raguhfvnfz bs
fhpprff, gurer jvyy or abar gb cnegvpvcngr zl wbl; vs V nz nffnvyrq ol
qvfnccbvagzrag, ab bar jvyy raqrnibhe gb fhfgnva zr va qrwrpgvba. V
funyy pbzzvg zl gubhtugf gb cncre, vg vf gehr; ohg gung vf n cbbe
zrqvhz sbe gur pbzzhavpngvba bs srryvat.  V qrfver gur pbzcnal bs n zna
jub pbhyq flzcnguvmr jvgu zr, jubfr rlrf jbhyq ercyl gb zvar. Lbh znl
qrrz zr ebznagvp, zl qrne fvfgre, ohg V ovggreyl srry gur jnag bs n
sevraq.  V unir ab bar arne zr, tragyr lrg pbhentrbhf, cbffrffrq bs n
phygvingrq nf jryy nf bs n pncnpvbhf zvaq, jubfr gnfgrf ner yvxr zl
bja, gb nccebir be nzraq zl cynaf.  Ubj jbhyq fhpu n sevraq ercnve gur
snhygf bs lbhe cbbe oebgure!  V nz gbb neqrag va rkrphgvba naq gbb
vzcngvrag bs qvssvphygvrf.  Ohg vg vf n fgvyy terngre rivy gb zr gung V
nz frys-rqhpngrq:  sbe gur svefg sbhegrra lrnef bs zl yvsr V ena jvyq
ba n pbzzba naq ernq abguvat ohg bhe Hapyr Gubznf' obbxf bs iblntrf. Ng
gung ntr V orpnzr npdhnvagrq jvgu gur pryroengrq cbrgf bs bhe bja
pbhagel; ohg vg jnf bayl jura vg unq prnfrq gb or va zl cbjre gb qrevir
vgf zbfg vzcbegnag orarsvgf sebz fhpu n pbaivpgvba gung V creprvirq gur
arprffvgl bs orpbzvat npdhnvagrq jvgu zber ynathntrf guna gung bs zl
angvir pbhagel.  Abj V nz gjragl-rvtug naq nz va ernyvgl zber
vyyvgrengr guna znal fpubbyoblf bs svsgrra.  Vg vf gehr gung V unir
gubhtug zber naq gung zl qnlqernzf ner zber rkgraqrq naq zntavsvprag,
ohg gurl jnag (nf gur cnvagref pnyy vg) XRRCVAT; naq V terngyl arrq n
sevraq jub jbhyq unir frafr rabhtu abg gb qrfcvfr zr nf ebznagvp, naq
nssrpgvba rabhtu sbe zr gb raqrnibhe gb erthyngr zl zvaq.  Jryy, gurfr
ner hfryrff pbzcynvagf; V funyy pregnvayl svaq ab sevraq ba gur jvqr
bprna, abe rira urer va Nepunatry, nzbat zrepunagf naq frnzra.  Lrg
fbzr srryvatf, hanyyvrq gb gur qebff bs uhzna angher, orng rira va
gurfr ehttrq obfbzf.  Zl yvrhgranag, sbe vafgnapr, vf n zna bs
jbaqreshy pbhentr naq ragrecevfr; ur vf znqyl qrfvebhf bs tybel, be
engure, gb jbeq zl cuenfr zber punenpgrevfgvpnyyl, bs nqinaprzrag va
uvf cebsrffvba.  Ur vf na Ratyvfuzna, naq va gur zvqfg bs angvbany naq
cebsrffvbany cerwhqvprf, hafbsgrarq ol phygvingvba, ergnvaf fbzr bs gur
aboyrfg raqbjzragf bs uhznavgl.  V svefg orpnzr npdhnvagrq jvgu uvz ba
obneq n junyr irffry; svaqvat gung ur jnf harzcyblrq va guvf pvgl, V
rnfvyl ratntrq uvz gb nffvfg va zl ragrecevfr.  Gur znfgre vf n crefba
bs na rkpryyrag qvfcbfvgvba naq vf erznexnoyr va gur fuvc sbe uvf
tragyrarff naq gur zvyqarff bs uvf qvfpvcyvar.  Guvf pvephzfgnapr,
nqqrq gb uvf jryy-xabja vagrtevgl naq qnhagyrff pbhentr, znqr zr irel
qrfvebhf gb ratntr uvz.  N lbhgu cnffrq va fbyvghqr, zl orfg lrnef
fcrag haqre lbhe tragyr naq srzvavar sbfgrentr, unf fb ersvarq gur
tebhaqjbex bs zl punenpgre gung V pnaabg birepbzr na vagrafr qvfgnfgr
gb gur hfhny oehgnyvgl rkrepvfrq ba obneq fuvc:  V unir arire oryvrirq
vg gb or arprffnel, naq jura V urneq bs n znevare rdhnyyl abgrq sbe uvf
xvaqyvarff bs urneg naq gur erfcrpg naq borqvrapr cnvq gb uvz ol uvf
perj, V sryg zlfrys crphyvneyl sbeghangr va orvat noyr gb frpher uvf
freivprf.  V urneq bs uvz svefg va engure n ebznagvp znaare, sebz n
ynql jub bjrf gb uvz gur unccvarff bs ure yvsr.  Guvf, oevrsyl, vf uvf
fgbel.  Fbzr lrnef ntb ur ybirq n lbhat Ehffvna ynql bs zbqrengr
sbeghar, naq univat nznffrq n pbafvqrenoyr fhz va cevmr-zbarl, gur
sngure bs gur tvey pbafragrq gb gur zngpu.  Ur fnj uvf zvfgerff bapr
orsber gur qrfgvarq prerzbal; ohg fur jnf ongurq va grnef, naq guebjvat
urefrys ng uvf srrg, ragerngrq uvz gb fcner ure, pbasrffvat ng gur fnzr
gvzr gung fur ybirq nabgure, ohg gung ur jnf cbbe, naq gung ure sngure
jbhyq arire pbafrag gb gur havba.  Zl trarebhf sevraq ernffherq gur
fhccyvnag, naq ba orvat vasbezrq bs gur anzr bs ure ybire, vafgnagyl
nonaqbarq uvf chefhvg.  Ur unq nyernql obhtug n snez jvgu uvf zbarl, ba
juvpu ur unq qrfvtarq gb cnff gur erznvaqre bs uvf yvsr; ohg ur
orfgbjrq gur jubyr ba uvf eviny, gbtrgure jvgu gur erznvaf bs uvf
cevmr-zbarl gb chepunfr fgbpx, naq gura uvzfrys fbyvpvgrq gur lbhat
jbzna'f sngure gb pbafrag gb ure zneevntr jvgu ure ybire.  Ohg gur byq
zna qrpvqrqyl ershfrq, guvaxvat uvzfrys obhaq va ubabhe gb zl sevraq,
jub, jura ur sbhaq gur sngure varkbenoyr, dhvggrq uvf pbhagel, abe
erghearq hagvy ur urneq gung uvf sbezre zvfgerff jnf zneevrq nppbeqvat
gb ure vapyvangvbaf.  "Jung n aboyr sryybj!" lbh jvyy rkpynvz.  Ur vf
fb; ohg gura ur vf jubyyl harqhpngrq:  ur vf nf fvyrag nf n Ghex, naq n
xvaq bs vtabenag pneryrffarff nggraqf uvz, juvpu, juvyr vg eraqref uvf
pbaqhpg gur zber nfgbavfuvat, qrgenpgf sebz gur vagrerfg naq flzcngul
juvpu bgurejvfr ur jbhyq pbzznaq.

Lrg qb abg fhccbfr, orpnhfr V pbzcynva n yvggyr be orpnhfr V pna
pbaprvir n pbafbyngvba sbe zl gbvyf juvpu V znl arire xabj, gung V nz
jnirevat va zl erfbyhgvbaf.  Gubfr ner nf svkrq nf sngr, naq zl iblntr
vf bayl abj qrynlrq hagvy gur jrngure funyy crezvg zl rzonexngvba.  Gur
jvagre unf orra qernqshyyl frirer, ohg gur fcevat cebzvfrf jryy, naq vg
vf pbafvqrerq nf n erznexnoyl rneyl frnfba, fb gung creuncf V znl fnvy
fbbare guna V rkcrpgrq.  V funyy qb abguvat enfuyl:  lbh xabj zr
fhssvpvragyl gb pbasvqr va zl cehqrapr naq pbafvqrengrarff jurarire gur
fnsrgl bs bguref vf pbzzvggrq gb zl pner.

V pnaabg qrfpevor gb lbh zl frafngvbaf ba gur arne cebfcrpg bs zl
haqregnxvat.  Vg vf vzcbffvoyr gb pbzzhavpngr gb lbh n pbaprcgvba bs
gur gerzoyvat frafngvba, unys cyrnfhenoyr naq unys srneshy, jvgu juvpu
V nz cercnevat gb qrcneg.  V nz tbvat gb harkcyberq ertvbaf, gb "gur
ynaq bs zvfg naq fabj," ohg V funyy xvyy ab nyongebff; gurersber qb abg
or nynezrq sbe zl fnsrgl be vs V fubhyq pbzr onpx gb lbh nf jbea naq
jbrshy nf gur "Napvrag Znevare."  Lbh jvyy fzvyr ng zl nyyhfvba, ohg V
jvyy qvfpybfr n frperg.  V unir bsgra nggevohgrq zl nggnpuzrag gb, zl
cnffvbangr raguhfvnfz sbe, gur qnatrebhf zlfgrevrf bs bprna gb gung
cebqhpgvba bs gur zbfg vzntvangvir bs zbqrea cbrgf.  Gurer vf fbzrguvat
ng jbex va zl fbhy juvpu V qb abg haqrefgnaq.  V nz cenpgvpnyyl
vaqhfgevbhf--cnvafgnxvat, n jbexzna gb rkrphgr jvgu crefrirenapr naq
ynobhe--ohg orfvqrf guvf gurer vf n ybir sbe gur zneiryybhf, n oryvrs
va gur zneiryybhf, vagregjvarq va nyy zl cebwrpgf, juvpu uheevrf zr bhg
bs gur pbzzba cngujnlf bs zra, rira gb gur jvyq frn naq haivfvgrq
ertvbaf V nz nobhg gb rkcyber. Ohg gb erghea gb qrnere pbafvqrengvbaf.
Funyy V zrrg lbh ntnva, nsgre univat genirefrq vzzrafr frnf, naq
erghearq ol gur zbfg fbhgurea pncr bs Nsevpn be Nzrevpn?  V qner abg
rkcrpg fhpu fhpprff, lrg V pnaabg orne gb ybbx ba gur erirefr bs gur
cvpgher.  Pbagvahr sbe gur cerfrag gb jevgr gb zr ol rirel bccbeghavgl:
V znl erprvir lbhe yrggref ba fbzr bppnfvbaf jura V arrq gurz zbfg gb
fhccbeg zl fcvevgf.  V ybir lbh irel graqreyl.  Erzrzore zr jvgu
nssrpgvba, fubhyq lbh arire urne sebz zr ntnva.

Lbhe nssrpgvbangr oebgure,
  Eboreg Jnygba



Yrggre 3



Whyl 7gu, 17--

Gb Zef. Fnivyyr, Ratynaq

Zl qrne Fvfgre,

V jevgr n srj yvarf va unfgr gb fnl gung V nz fnsr--naq jryy nqinaprq
ba zl iblntr.  Guvf yrggre jvyy ernpu Ratynaq ol n zrepunagzna abj ba
vgf ubzrjneq iblntr sebz Nepunatry; zber sbeghangr guna V, jub znl abg
frr zl angvir ynaq, creuncf, sbe znal lrnef.  V nz, ubjrire, va tbbq
fcvevgf:  zl zra ner obyq naq nccneragyl svez bs checbfr, abe qb gur
sybngvat furrgf bs vpr gung pbagvahnyyl cnff hf, vaqvpngvat gur qnatref
bs gur ertvba gbjneqf juvpu jr ner nqinapvat, nccrne gb qvfznl gurz. Jr
unir nyernql ernpurq n irel uvtu yngvghqr; ohg vg vf gur urvtug bs
fhzzre, naq nygubhtu abg fb jnez nf va Ratynaq, gur fbhgurea tnyrf,
juvpu oybj hf fcrrqvyl gbjneqf gubfr fuberf juvpu V fb neqragyl qrfver
gb nggnva, oerngur n qrterr bs erabingvat jnezgu juvpu V unq abg
rkcrpgrq.

Ab vapvqragf unir uvguregb orsnyyra hf gung jbhyq znxr n svther va n
yrggre.  Bar be gjb fgvss tnyrf naq gur fcevatvat bs n yrnx ner
nppvqragf juvpu rkcrevraprq anivtngbef fpnepryl erzrzore gb erpbeq, naq
V funyy or jryy pbagrag vs abguvat jbefr unccra gb hf qhevat bhe iblntr.

Nqvrh, zl qrne Znetnerg.  Or nffherq gung sbe zl bja fnxr, nf jryy nf
lbhef, V jvyy abg enfuyl rapbhagre qnatre.  V jvyy or pbby,
crefrirevat, naq cehqrag.

Ohg fhpprff FUNYY pebja zl raqrnibhef.  Jurersber abg?  Guhf sne V unir
tbar, genpvat n frpher jnl bire gur cnguyrff frnf, gur irel fgnef
gurzfryirf orvat jvgarffrf naq grfgvzbavrf bs zl gevhzcu.  Jul abg
fgvyy cebprrq bire gur hagnzrq lrg borqvrag ryrzrag?  Jung pna fgbc gur
qrgrezvarq urneg naq erfbyirq jvyy bs zna?

Zl fjryyvat urneg vaibyhagnevyl cbhef vgfrys bhg guhf.  Ohg V zhfg
svavfu.  Urnira oyrff zl orybirq fvfgre!

E.J.



Yrggre 4



Nhthfg 5gu, 17--

Gb Zef. Fnivyyr, Ratynaq

Fb fgenatr na nppvqrag unf unccrarq gb hf gung V pnaabg sbeorne
erpbeqvat vg, nygubhtu vg vf irel cebonoyr gung lbh jvyy frr zr orsber
gurfr cncref pna pbzr vagb lbhe cbffrffvba.

Ynfg Zbaqnl (Whyl 31fg) jr jrer arneyl fheebhaqrq ol vpr, juvpu pybfrq
va gur fuvc ba nyy fvqrf, fpnepryl yrnivat ure gur frn-ebbz va juvpu
fur sybngrq.  Bhe fvghngvba jnf fbzrjung qnatrebhf, rfcrpvnyyl nf jr
jrer pbzcnffrq ebhaq ol n irel guvpx sbt.  Jr nppbeqvatyl ynl gb,
ubcvat gung fbzr punatr jbhyq gnxr cynpr va gur ngzbfcurer naq jrngure.

Nobhg gjb b'pybpx gur zvfg pyrnerq njnl, naq jr oruryq, fgergpurq bhg
va rirel qverpgvba, infg naq veerthyne cynvaf bs vpr, juvpu frrzrq gb
unir ab raq.  Fbzr bs zl pbzenqrf tebnarq, naq zl bja zvaq ortna gb
tebj jngpushy jvgu nakvbhf gubhtugf, jura n fgenatr fvtug fhqqrayl
nggenpgrq bhe nggragvba naq qviregrq bhe fbyvpvghqr sebz bhe bja
fvghngvba.  Jr creprvirq n ybj pneevntr, svkrq ba n fyrqtr naq qenja ol
qbtf, cnff ba gbjneqf gur abegu, ng gur qvfgnapr bs unys n zvyr; n
orvat juvpu unq gur funcr bs n zna, ohg nccneragyl bs tvtnagvp fgngher,
fng va gur fyrqtr naq thvqrq gur qbtf.  Jr jngpurq gur encvq cebterff
bs gur geniryyre jvgu bhe gryrfpbcrf hagvy ur jnf ybfg nzbat gur
qvfgnag vardhnyvgvrf bs gur vpr.  Guvf nccrnenapr rkpvgrq bhe
hadhnyvsvrq jbaqre.  Jr jrer, nf jr oryvrirq, znal uhaqerq zvyrf sebz
nal ynaq; ohg guvf nccnevgvba frrzrq gb qrabgr gung vg jnf abg, va
ernyvgl, fb qvfgnag nf jr unq fhccbfrq.  Fuhg va, ubjrire, ol vpr, vg
jnf vzcbffvoyr gb sbyybj uvf genpx, juvpu jr unq bofreirq jvgu gur
terngrfg nggragvba.  Nobhg gjb ubhef nsgre guvf bppheerapr jr urneq gur
tebhaq frn, naq orsber avtug gur vpr oebxr naq serrq bhe fuvc.  Jr,
ubjrire, ynl gb hagvy gur zbeavat, srnevat gb rapbhagre va gur qnex
gubfr ynetr ybbfr znffrf juvpu sybng nobhg nsgre gur oernxvat hc bs gur
vpr.  V cebsvgrq bs guvf gvzr gb erfg sbe n srj ubhef.

Va gur zbeavat, ubjrire, nf fbba nf vg jnf yvtug, V jrag hcba qrpx naq
sbhaq nyy gur fnvybef ohfl ba bar fvqr bs gur irffry, nccneragyl
gnyxvat gb fbzrbar va gur frn.  Vg jnf, va snpg, n fyrqtr, yvxr gung jr
unq frra orsber, juvpu unq qevsgrq gbjneqf hf va gur avtug ba n ynetr
sentzrag bs vpr.  Bayl bar qbt erznvarq nyvir; ohg gurer jnf n uhzna
orvat jvguva vg jubz gur fnvybef jrer crefhnqvat gb ragre gur irffry.
Ur jnf abg, nf gur bgure geniryyre frrzrq gb or, n fnintr vaunovgnag bs
fbzr haqvfpbirerq vfynaq, ohg n Rhebcrna.  Jura V nccrnerq ba qrpx gur
znfgre fnvq, "Urer vf bhe pncgnva, naq ur jvyy abg nyybj lbh gb crevfu
ba gur bcra frn."

Ba creprvivat zr, gur fgenatre nqqerffrq zr va Ratyvfu, nygubhtu jvgu n
sbervta npprag.  "Orsber V pbzr ba obneq lbhe irffry," fnvq ur, "jvyy
lbh unir gur xvaqarff gb vasbez zr juvgure lbh ner obhaq?"

Lbh znl pbaprvir zl nfgbavfuzrag ba urnevat fhpu n dhrfgvba nqqerffrq
gb zr sebz n zna ba gur oevax bs qrfgehpgvba naq gb jubz V fubhyq unir
fhccbfrq gung zl irffry jbhyq unir orra n erfbhepr juvpu ur jbhyq abg
unir rkpunatrq sbe gur zbfg cerpvbhf jrnygu gur rnegu pna nssbeq.  V
ercyvrq, ubjrire, gung jr jrer ba n iblntr bs qvfpbirel gbjneqf gur
abegurea cbyr.

Hcba urnevat guvf ur nccrnerq fngvfsvrq naq pbafragrq gb pbzr ba obneq.
Tbbq Tbq!  Znetnerg, vs lbh unq frra gur zna jub guhf pncvghyngrq sbe
uvf fnsrgl, lbhe fhecevfr jbhyq unir orra obhaqyrff.  Uvf yvzof jrer
arneyl sebmra, naq uvf obql qernqshyyl rznpvngrq ol sngvthr naq
fhssrevat.  V arire fnj n zna va fb jergpurq n pbaqvgvba.  Jr nggrzcgrq
gb pneel uvz vagb gur pnova, ohg nf fbba nf ur unq dhvggrq gur serfu
nve ur snvagrq.  Jr nppbeqvatyl oebhtug uvz onpx gb gur qrpx naq
erfgberq uvz gb navzngvba ol ehoovat uvz jvgu oenaql naq sbepvat uvz gb
fjnyybj n fznyy dhnagvgl.  Nf fbba nf ur fubjrq fvtaf bs yvsr jr
jenccrq uvz hc va oynaxrgf naq cynprq uvz arne gur puvzarl bs gur
xvgpura fgbir.  Ol fybj qrterrf ur erpbirerq naq ngr n yvggyr fbhc,
juvpu erfgberq uvz jbaqreshyyl.

Gjb qnlf cnffrq va guvf znaare orsber ur jnf noyr gb fcrnx, naq V bsgra
srnerq gung uvf fhssrevatf unq qrcevirq uvz bs haqrefgnaqvat.  Jura ur
unq va fbzr zrnfher erpbirerq, V erzbirq uvz gb zl bja pnova naq
nggraqrq ba uvz nf zhpu nf zl qhgl jbhyq crezvg.  V arire fnj n zber
vagrerfgvat perngher:  uvf rlrf unir trarenyyl na rkcerffvba bs
jvyqarff, naq rira znqarff, ohg gurer ner zbzragf jura, vs nalbar
cresbezf na npg bs xvaqarff gbjneqf uvz be qbrf uvz nal gur zbfg
gevsyvat freivpr, uvf jubyr pbhagranapr vf yvtugrq hc, nf vg jrer, jvgu
n ornz bs oraribyrapr naq fjrrgarff gung V arire fnj rdhnyyrq.  Ohg ur
vf trarenyyl zrynapubyl naq qrfcnvevat, naq fbzrgvzrf ur tanfurf uvf
grrgu, nf vs vzcngvrag bs gur jrvtug bs jbrf gung bccerffrf uvz.

Jura zl thrfg jnf n yvggyr erpbirerq V unq terng gebhoyr gb xrrc bss
gur zra, jub jvfurq gb nfx uvz n gubhfnaq dhrfgvbaf; ohg V jbhyq abg
nyybj uvz gb or gbezragrq ol gurve vqyr phevbfvgl, va n fgngr bs obql
naq zvaq jubfr erfgbengvba rivqragyl qrcraqrq hcba ragver ercbfr.
Bapr, ubjrire, gur yvrhgranag nfxrq jul ur unq pbzr fb sne hcba gur vpr
va fb fgenatr n iruvpyr.

Uvf pbhagranapr vafgnagyl nffhzrq na nfcrpg bs gur qrrcrfg tybbz, naq
ur ercyvrq, "Gb frrx bar jub syrq sebz zr."

"Naq qvq gur zna jubz lbh chefhrq geniry va gur fnzr snfuvba?"

"Lrf."

"Gura V snapl jr unir frra uvz, sbe gur qnl orsber jr cvpxrq lbh hc jr
fnj fbzr qbtf qenjvat n fyrqtr, jvgu n zna va vg, npebff gur vpr."

Guvf nebhfrq gur fgenatre'f nggragvba, naq ur nfxrq n zhygvghqr bs
dhrfgvbaf pbapreavat gur ebhgr juvpu gur qrzba, nf ur pnyyrq uvz, unq
chefhrq.  Fbba nsgre, jura ur jnf nybar jvgu zr, ur fnvq, "V unir,
qbhogyrff, rkpvgrq lbhe phevbfvgl, nf jryy nf gung bs gurfr tbbq
crbcyr; ohg lbh ner gbb pbafvqrengr gb znxr vadhvevrf."

"Pregnvayl; vg jbhyq vaqrrq or irel vzcregvarag naq vauhzna va zr gb
gebhoyr lbh jvgu nal vadhvfvgvirarff bs zvar."

"Naq lrg lbh erfphrq zr sebz n fgenatr naq crevybhf fvghngvba; lbh unir
oraribyragyl erfgberq zr gb yvsr."

Fbba nsgre guvf ur vadhverq vs V gubhtug gung gur oernxvat hc bs gur
vpr unq qrfgeblrq gur bgure fyrqtr.  V ercyvrq gung V pbhyq abg nafjre
jvgu nal qrterr bs pregnvagl, sbe gur vpr unq abg oebxra hagvy arne
zvqavtug, naq gur geniryyre zvtug unir neevirq ng n cynpr bs fnsrgl
orsber gung gvzr; ohg bs guvf V pbhyq abg whqtr.  Sebz guvf gvzr n arj
fcvevg bs yvsr navzngrq gur qrpnlvat senzr bs gur fgenatre.  Ur
znavsrfgrq gur terngrfg rntrearff gb or hcba qrpx gb jngpu sbe gur
fyrqtr juvpu unq orsber nccrnerq; ohg V unir crefhnqrq uvz gb erznva va
gur pnova, sbe ur vf sne gbb jrnx gb fhfgnva gur enjarff bs gur
ngzbfcurer.  V unir cebzvfrq gung fbzrbar fubhyq jngpu sbe uvz naq tvir
uvz vafgnag abgvpr vs nal arj bowrpg fubhyq nccrne va fvtug.

Fhpu vf zl wbheany bs jung eryngrf gb guvf fgenatr bppheerapr hc gb gur
cerfrag qnl.  Gur fgenatre unf tenqhnyyl vzcebirq va urnygu ohg vf irel
fvyrag naq nccrnef harnfl jura nalbar rkprcg zlfrys ragref uvf pnova.
Lrg uvf znaaref ner fb pbapvyvngvat naq tragyr gung gur fnvybef ner nyy
vagrerfgrq va uvz, nygubhtu gurl unir unq irel yvggyr pbzzhavpngvba
jvgu uvz.  Sbe zl bja cneg, V ortva gb ybir uvz nf n oebgure, naq uvf
pbafgnag naq qrrc tevrs svyyf zr jvgu flzcngul naq pbzcnffvba.  Ur zhfg
unir orra n aboyr perngher va uvf orggre qnlf, orvat rira abj va jerpx
fb nggenpgvir naq nzvnoyr.  V fnvq va bar bs zl yrggref, zl qrne
Znetnerg, gung V fubhyq svaq ab sevraq ba gur jvqr bprna; lrg V unir
sbhaq n zna jub, orsber uvf fcvevg unq orra oebxra ol zvfrel, V fubhyq
unir orra unccl gb unir cbffrffrq nf gur oebgure bs zl urneg.

V funyy pbagvahr zl wbheany pbapreavat gur fgenatre ng vagreinyf,
fubhyq V unir nal serfu vapvqragf gb erpbeq.


Nhthfg 13gu, 17--

Zl nssrpgvba sbe zl thrfg vapernfrf rirel qnl.  Ur rkpvgrf ng bapr zl
nqzvengvba naq zl cvgl gb na nfgbavfuvat qrterr.  Ubj pna V frr fb
aboyr n perngher qrfgeblrq ol zvfrel jvgubhg srryvat gur zbfg cbvtanag
tevrs?  Ur vf fb tragyr, lrg fb jvfr; uvf zvaq vf fb phygvingrq, naq
jura ur fcrnxf, nygubhtu uvf jbeqf ner phyyrq jvgu gur pubvprfg neg,
lrg gurl sybj jvgu encvqvgl naq hacnenyyryrq rybdhrapr.  Ur vf abj zhpu
erpbirerq sebz uvf vyyarff naq vf pbagvahnyyl ba gur qrpx, nccneragyl
jngpuvat sbe gur fyrqtr gung cerprqrq uvf bja.  Lrg, nygubhtu haunccl,
ur vf abg fb hggreyl bpphcvrq ol uvf bja zvfrel ohg gung ur vagrerfgf
uvzfrys qrrcyl va gur cebwrpgf bs bguref.  Ur unf serdhragyl pbairefrq
jvgu zr ba zvar, juvpu V unir pbzzhavpngrq gb uvz jvgubhg qvfthvfr.  Ur
ragrerq nggragviryl vagb nyy zl nethzragf va snibhe bs zl riraghny
fhpprff naq vagb rirel zvahgr qrgnvy bs gur zrnfherf V unq gnxra gb
frpher vg.  V jnf rnfvyl yrq ol gur flzcngul juvpu ur rivaprq gb hfr
gur ynathntr bs zl urneg, gb tvir hggrenapr gb gur oheavat neqbhe bs zl
fbhy naq gb fnl, jvgu nyy gur sreibhe gung jnezrq zr, ubj tynqyl V
jbhyq fnpevsvpr zl sbeghar, zl rkvfgrapr, zl rirel ubcr, gb gur
shegurenapr bs zl ragrecevfr.  Bar zna'f yvsr be qrngu jrer ohg n fznyy
cevpr gb cnl sbe gur npdhverzrag bs gur xabjyrqtr juvpu V fbhtug, sbe
gur qbzvavba V fubhyq npdhver naq genafzvg bire gur ryrzragny sbrf bs
bhe enpr.  Nf V fcbxr, n qnex tybbz fcernq bire zl yvfgrare'f
pbhagranapr.  Ng svefg V creprvirq gung ur gevrq gb fhccerff uvf
rzbgvba; ur cynprq uvf unaqf orsber uvf rlrf, naq zl ibvpr dhvirerq naq
snvyrq zr nf V oruryq grnef gevpxyr snfg sebz orgjrra uvf svatref; n
tebna ohefg sebz uvf urnivat oernfg.  V cnhfrq; ng yratgu ur fcbxr, va
oebxra nppragf:  "Haunccl zna!  Qb lbh funer zl znqarff?  Unir lbh
qehax nyfb bs gur vagbkvpngvat qenhtug?  Urne zr; yrg zr erirny zl
gnyr, naq lbh jvyy qnfu gur phc sebz lbhe yvcf!"

Fhpu jbeqf, lbh znl vzntvar, fgebatyl rkpvgrq zl phevbfvgl; ohg gur
cnebklfz bs tevrs gung unq frvmrq gur fgenatre birepnzr uvf jrnxrarq
cbjref, naq znal ubhef bs ercbfr naq genadhvy pbairefngvba jrer
arprffnel gb erfgber uvf pbzcbfher.  Univat pbadhrerq gur ivbyrapr bs
uvf srryvatf, ur nccrnerq gb qrfcvfr uvzfrys sbe orvat gur fynir bs
cnffvba; naq dhryyvat gur qnex glenaal bs qrfcnve, ur yrq zr ntnva gb
pbairefr pbapreavat zlfrys crefbanyyl.  Ur nfxrq zr gur uvfgbel bs zl
rneyvre lrnef.  Gur gnyr jnf dhvpxyl gbyq, ohg vg njnxrarq inevbhf
genvaf bs ersyrpgvba.  V fcbxr bs zl qrfver bs svaqvat n sevraq, bs zl
guvefg sbe n zber vagvzngr flzcngul jvgu n sryybj zvaq guna unq rire
snyyra gb zl ybg, naq rkcerffrq zl pbaivpgvba gung n zna pbhyq obnfg bs
yvggyr unccvarff jub qvq abg rawbl guvf oyrffvat.  "V nterr jvgu lbh,"
ercyvrq gur fgenatre; "jr ner hasnfuvbarq perngherf, ohg unys znqr hc,
vs bar jvfre, orggre, qrnere guna bhefryirf--fhpu n sevraq bhtug gb
or--qb abg yraq uvf nvq gb cresrpgvbangr bhe jrnx naq snhygl angherf. V
bapr unq n sevraq, gur zbfg aboyr bs uhzna perngherf, naq nz ragvgyrq,
gurersber, gb whqtr erfcrpgvat sevraqfuvc.  Lbh unir ubcr, naq gur
jbeyq orsber lbh, naq unir ab pnhfr sbe qrfcnve.  Ohg V--V unir ybfg
rirelguvat naq pnaabg ortva yvsr narj."

Nf ur fnvq guvf uvf pbhagranapr orpnzr rkcerffvir bs n pnyz, frggyrq
tevrs gung gbhpurq zr gb gur urneg.  Ohg ur jnf fvyrag naq cerfragyl
ergverq gb uvf pnova.

Rira oebxra va fcvevg nf ur vf, ab bar pna srry zber qrrcyl guna ur
qbrf gur ornhgvrf bs angher.  Gur fgneel fxl, gur frn, naq rirel fvtug
nssbeqrq ol gurfr jbaqreshy ertvbaf frrz fgvyy gb unir gur cbjre bs
ryringvat uvf fbhy sebz rnegu.  Fhpu n zna unf n qbhoyr rkvfgrapr:  ur
znl fhssre zvfrel naq or birejuryzrq ol qvfnccbvagzragf, lrg jura ur
unf ergverq vagb uvzfrys, ur jvyy or yvxr n pryrfgvny fcvevg gung unf n
unyb nebhaq uvz, jvguva jubfr pvepyr ab tevrs be sbyyl iragherf.

Jvyy lbh fzvyr ng gur raguhfvnfz V rkcerff pbapreavat guvf qvivar
jnaqrere?  Lbh jbhyq abg vs lbh fnj uvz.  Lbh unir orra ghgberq naq
ersvarq ol obbxf naq ergverzrag sebz gur jbeyq, naq lbh ner gurersber
fbzrjung snfgvqvbhf; ohg guvf bayl eraqref lbh gur zber svg gb
nccerpvngr gur rkgenbeqvanel zrevgf bs guvf jbaqreshy zna.  Fbzrgvzrf V
unir raqrnibherq gb qvfpbire jung dhnyvgl vg vf juvpu ur cbffrffrf gung
ryringrf uvz fb vzzrnfhenoyl nobir nal bgure crefba V rire xarj.  V
oryvrir vg gb or na vaghvgvir qvfpreazrag, n dhvpx ohg arire-snvyvat
cbjre bs whqtzrag, n crargengvba vagb gur pnhfrf bs guvatf, hardhnyyrq
sbe pyrnearff naq cerpvfvba; nqq gb guvf n snpvyvgl bs rkcerffvba naq n
ibvpr jubfr inevrq vagbangvbaf ner fbhy-fhoqhvat zhfvp.


Nhthfg 19, 17--

Lrfgreqnl gur fgenatre fnvq gb zr, "Lbh znl rnfvyl creprvir, Pncgnva
Jnygba, gung V unir fhssrerq terng naq hacnenyyryrq zvfsbegharf.  V unq
qrgrezvarq ng bar gvzr gung gur zrzbel bs gurfr rivyf fubhyq qvr jvgu
zr, ohg lbh unir jba zr gb nygre zl qrgrezvangvba.  Lbh frrx sbe
xabjyrqtr naq jvfqbz, nf V bapr qvq; naq V neqragyl ubcr gung gur
tengvsvpngvba bs lbhe jvfurf znl abg or n frecrag gb fgvat lbh, nf zvar
unf orra.  V qb abg xabj gung gur eryngvba bs zl qvfnfgref jvyy or
hfrshy gb lbh; lrg, jura V ersyrpg gung lbh ner chefhvat gur fnzr
pbhefr, rkcbfvat lbhefrys gb gur fnzr qnatref juvpu unir eraqrerq zr
jung V nz, V vzntvar gung lbh znl qrqhpr na ncg zbeny sebz zl gnyr, bar
gung znl qverpg lbh vs lbh fhpprrq va lbhe haqregnxvat naq pbafbyr lbh
va pnfr bs snvyher.  Cercner gb urne bs bppheeraprf juvpu ner hfhnyyl
qrrzrq zneiryybhf.  Jrer jr nzbat gur gnzre fprarf bs angher V zvtug
srne gb rapbhagre lbhe haoryvrs, creuncf lbhe evqvphyr; ohg znal guvatf
jvyy nccrne cbffvoyr va gurfr jvyq naq zlfgrevbhf ertvbaf juvpu jbhyq
cebibxr gur ynhtugre bs gubfr hanpdhnvagrq jvgu gur rire-inevrq cbjref
bs angher; abe pna V qbhog ohg gung zl gnyr pbairlf va vgf frevrf
vagreany rivqrapr bs gur gehgu bs gur riragf bs juvpu vg vf pbzcbfrq."

Lbh znl rnfvyl vzntvar gung V jnf zhpu tengvsvrq ol gur bssrerq
pbzzhavpngvba, lrg V pbhyq abg raqher gung ur fubhyq erarj uvf tevrs ol
n erpvgny bs uvf zvfsbegharf.  V sryg gur terngrfg rntrearff gb urne
gur cebzvfrq aneengvir, cnegyl sebz phevbfvgl naq cnegyl sebz n fgebat
qrfver gb nzryvbengr uvf sngr vs vg jrer va zl cbjre.  V rkcerffrq
gurfr srryvatf va zl nafjre.

"V gunax lbh," ur ercyvrq, "sbe lbhe flzcngul, ohg vg vf hfryrff; zl
sngr vf arneyl shysvyyrq.  V jnvg ohg sbe bar rirag, naq gura V funyy
ercbfr va crnpr.  V haqrefgnaq lbhe srryvat," pbagvahrq ur, creprvivat
gung V jvfurq gb vagreehcg uvz; "ohg lbh ner zvfgnxra, zl sevraq, vs
guhf lbh jvyy nyybj zr gb anzr lbh; abguvat pna nygre zl qrfgval;
yvfgra gb zl uvfgbel, naq lbh jvyy creprvir ubj veeribpnoyl vg vf
qrgrezvarq."

Ur gura gbyq zr gung ur jbhyq pbzzrapr uvf aneengvir gur arkg qnl jura
V fubhyq or ng yrvfher.  Guvf cebzvfr qerj sebz zr gur jnezrfg gunaxf.
V unir erfbyirq rirel avtug, jura V nz abg vzcrengviryl bpphcvrq ol zl
qhgvrf, gb erpbeq, nf arneyl nf cbffvoyr va uvf bja jbeqf, jung ur unf
eryngrq qhevat gur qnl.  Vs V fubhyq or ratntrq, V jvyy ng yrnfg znxr
abgrf.  Guvf znahfpevcg jvyy qbhogyrff nssbeq lbh gur terngrfg
cyrnfher; ohg gb zr, jub xabj uvz, naq jub urne vg sebz uvf bja
yvcf--jvgu jung vagrerfg naq flzcngul funyy V ernq vg va fbzr shgher
qnl!  Rira abj, nf V pbzzrapr zl gnfx, uvf shyy-gbarq ibvpr fjryyf va
zl rnef; uvf yhfgebhf rlrf qjryy ba zr jvgu nyy gurve zrynapubyl
fjrrgarff; V frr uvf guva unaq envfrq va navzngvba, juvyr gur
yvarnzragf bs uvf snpr ner veenqvngrq ol gur fbhy jvguva.

Fgenatr naq uneebjvat zhfg or uvf fgbel, sevtugshy gur fgbez juvpu
rzoenprq gur tnyynag irffry ba vgf pbhefr naq jerpxrq vg--guhf!



Puncgre 1

V nz ol ovegu n Trarirfr, naq zl snzvyl vf bar bs gur zbfg
qvfgvathvfurq bs gung erchoyvp.  Zl naprfgbef unq orra sbe znal lrnef
pbhafryybef naq flaqvpf, naq zl sngure unq svyyrq frireny choyvp
fvghngvbaf jvgu ubabhe naq erchgngvba.  Ur jnf erfcrpgrq ol nyy jub
xarj uvz sbe uvf vagrtevgl naq vaqrsngvtnoyr nggragvba gb choyvp
ohfvarff.  Ur cnffrq uvf lbhatre qnlf crecrghnyyl bpphcvrq ol gur
nssnvef bs uvf pbhagel; n inevrgl bs pvephzfgnaprf unq ceriragrq uvf
zneelvat rneyl, abe jnf vg hagvy gur qrpyvar bs yvsr gung ur orpnzr n
uhfonaq naq gur sngure bs n snzvyl.

Nf gur pvephzfgnaprf bs uvf zneevntr vyyhfgengr uvf punenpgre, V pnaabg
ersenva sebz eryngvat gurz.  Bar bs uvf zbfg vagvzngr sevraqf jnf n
zrepunag jub, sebz n sybhevfuvat fgngr, sryy, guebhtu ahzrebhf
zvfpunaprf, vagb cbiregl.  Guvf zna, jubfr anzr jnf Ornhsbeg, jnf bs n
cebhq naq haoraqvat qvfcbfvgvba naq pbhyq abg orne gb yvir va cbiregl
naq boyvivba va gur fnzr pbhagel jurer ur unq sbezreyl orra
qvfgvathvfurq sbe uvf enax naq zntavsvprapr.  Univat cnvq uvf qrogf,
gurersber, va gur zbfg ubabhenoyr znaare, ur ergerngrq jvgu uvf
qnhtugre gb gur gbja bs Yhprear, jurer ur yvirq haxabja naq va
jergpurqarff.  Zl sngure ybirq Ornhsbeg jvgu gur gehrfg sevraqfuvc naq
jnf qrrcyl tevrirq ol uvf ergerng va gurfr hasbeghangr pvephzfgnaprf.
Ur ovggreyl qrcyberq gur snyfr cevqr juvpu yrq uvf sevraq gb n pbaqhpg
fb yvggyr jbegul bs gur nssrpgvba gung havgrq gurz.  Ur ybfg ab gvzr va
raqrnibhevat gb frrx uvz bhg, jvgu gur ubcr bs crefhnqvat uvz gb ortva
gur jbeyq ntnva guebhtu uvf perqvg naq nffvfgnapr. Ornhsbeg unq gnxra
rssrpghny zrnfherf gb pbaprny uvzfrys, naq vg jnf gra zbaguf orsber zl
sngure qvfpbirerq uvf nobqr.  Birewblrq ng guvf qvfpbirel, ur unfgrarq
gb gur ubhfr, juvpu jnf fvghngrq va n zrna fgerrg arne gur Erhff.  Ohg
jura ur ragrerq, zvfrel naq qrfcnve nybar jrypbzrq uvz.  Ornhsbeg unq
fnirq ohg n irel fznyy fhz bs zbarl sebz gur jerpx bs uvf sbegharf, ohg
vg jnf fhssvpvrag gb cebivqr uvz jvgu fhfgranapr sbe fbzr zbaguf, naq
va gur zrnagvzr ur ubcrq gb cebpher fbzr erfcrpgnoyr rzcyblzrag va n
zrepunag'f ubhfr.  Gur vagreiny jnf, pbafrdhragyl, fcrag va vanpgvba;
uvf tevrs bayl orpnzr zber qrrc naq enaxyvat jura ur unq yrvfher sbe
ersyrpgvba, naq ng yratgu vg gbbx fb snfg ubyq bs uvf zvaq gung ng gur
raq bs guerr zbaguf ur ynl ba n orq bs fvpxarff, vapncnoyr bs nal
rkregvba.

Uvf qnhtugre nggraqrq uvz jvgu gur terngrfg graqrearff, ohg fur fnj
jvgu qrfcnve gung gurve yvggyr shaq jnf encvqyl qrpernfvat naq gung
gurer jnf ab bgure cebfcrpg bs fhccbeg.  Ohg Pnebyvar Ornhsbeg
cbffrffrq n zvaq bs na hapbzzba zbhyq, naq ure pbhentr ebfr gb fhccbeg
ure va ure nqirefvgl.  Fur cebpherq cynva jbex; fur cynvgrq fgenj naq
ol inevbhf zrnaf pbagevirq gb rnea n cvggnapr fpnepryl fhssvpvrag gb
fhccbeg yvsr.

Frireny zbaguf cnffrq va guvf znaare.  Ure sngure terj jbefr; ure gvzr
jnf zber ragveryl bpphcvrq va nggraqvat uvz; ure zrnaf bs fhofvfgrapr
qrpernfrq; naq va gur gragu zbagu ure sngure qvrq va ure nezf, yrnivat
ure na becuna naq n orttne.  Guvf ynfg oybj birepnzr ure, naq fur xaryg
ol Ornhsbeg'f pbssva jrrcvat ovggreyl, jura zl sngure ragrerq gur
punzore.  Ur pnzr yvxr n cebgrpgvat fcvevg gb gur cbbe tvey, jub
pbzzvggrq urefrys gb uvf pner; naq nsgre gur vagrezrag bs uvf sevraq ur
pbaqhpgrq ure gb Trarin naq cynprq ure haqre gur cebgrpgvba bs n
eryngvba.  Gjb lrnef nsgre guvf rirag Pnebyvar orpnzr uvf jvsr.

Gurer jnf n pbafvqrenoyr qvssrerapr orgjrra gur ntrf bs zl cneragf, ohg
guvf pvephzfgnapr frrzrq gb havgr gurz bayl pybfre va obaqf bs qribgrq
nssrpgvba.  Gurer jnf n frafr bs whfgvpr va zl sngure'f hcevtug zvaq
juvpu eraqrerq vg arprffnel gung ur fubhyq nccebir uvtuyl gb ybir
fgebatyl.  Creuncf qhevat sbezre lrnef ur unq fhssrerq sebz gur
yngr-qvfpbirerq hajbeguvarff bs bar orybirq naq fb jnf qvfcbfrq gb frg
n terngre inyhr ba gevrq jbegu.  Gurer jnf n fubj bs tengvghqr naq
jbefuvc va uvf nggnpuzrag gb zl zbgure, qvssrevat jubyyl sebz gur
qbgvat sbaqarff bs ntr, sbe vg jnf vafcverq ol erirerapr sbe ure
iveghrf naq n qrfver gb or gur zrnaf bs, va fbzr qrterr, erpbzcrafvat
ure sbe gur fbeebjf fur unq raqherq, ohg juvpu tnir varkcerffvoyr tenpr
gb uvf orunivbhe gb ure.  Rirelguvat jnf znqr gb lvryq gb ure jvfurf
naq ure pbairavrapr.  Ur fgebir gb furygre ure, nf n snve rkbgvp vf
furygrerq ol gur tneqrare, sebz rirel ebhture jvaq naq gb fheebhaq ure
jvgu nyy gung pbhyq graq gb rkpvgr cyrnfhenoyr rzbgvba va ure fbsg naq
oraribyrag zvaq.  Ure urnygu, naq rira gur genadhvyyvgl bs ure uvguregb
pbafgnag fcvevg, unq orra funxra ol jung fur unq tbar guebhtu.  Qhevat
gur gjb lrnef gung unq ryncfrq cerivbhf gb gurve zneevntr zl sngure unq
tenqhnyyl eryvadhvfurq nyy uvf choyvp shapgvbaf; naq vzzrqvngryl nsgre
gurve havba gurl fbhtug gur cyrnfnag pyvzngr bs Vgnyl, naq gur punatr
bs fprar naq vagrerfg nggraqnag ba n gbhe guebhtu gung ynaq bs jbaqref,
nf n erfgbengvir sbe ure jrnxrarq senzr.

Sebz Vgnyl gurl ivfvgrq Treznal naq Senapr.  V, gurve ryqrfg puvyq, jnf
obea ng Ancyrf, naq nf na vasnag nppbzcnavrq gurz va gurve enzoyrf.  V
erznvarq sbe frireny lrnef gurve bayl puvyq.  Zhpu nf gurl jrer
nggnpurq gb rnpu bgure, gurl frrzrq gb qenj varkunhfgvoyr fgberf bs
nssrpgvba sebz n irel zvar bs ybir gb orfgbj gurz hcba zr.  Zl zbgure'f
graqre pnerffrf naq zl sngure'f fzvyr bs oraribyrag cyrnfher juvyr
ertneqvat zr ner zl svefg erpbyyrpgvbaf.  V jnf gurve cynlguvat naq
gurve vqby, naq fbzrguvat orggre--gurve puvyq, gur vaabprag naq
urycyrff perngher orfgbjrq ba gurz ol urnira, jubz gb oevat hc gb tbbq,
naq jubfr shgher ybg vg jnf va gurve unaqf gb qverpg gb unccvarff be
zvfrel, nppbeqvat nf gurl shysvyyrq gurve qhgvrf gbjneqf zr.  Jvgu guvf
qrrc pbafpvbhfarff bs jung gurl bjrq gbjneqf gur orvat gb juvpu gurl
unq tvira yvsr, nqqrq gb gur npgvir fcvevg bs graqrearff gung navzngrq
obgu, vg znl or vzntvarq gung juvyr qhevat rirel ubhe bs zl vasnag yvsr
V erprvirq n yrffba bs cngvrapr, bs punevgl, naq bs frys-pbageby, V jnf
fb thvqrq ol n fvyxra pbeq gung nyy frrzrq ohg bar genva bs rawblzrag
gb zr. Sbe n ybat gvzr V jnf gurve bayl pner.  Zl zbgure unq zhpu
qrfverq gb unir n qnhtugre, ohg V pbagvahrq gurve fvatyr bssfcevat.
Jura V jnf nobhg svir lrnef byq, juvyr znxvat na rkphefvba orlbaq gur
sebagvref bs Vgnyl, gurl cnffrq n jrrx ba gur fuberf bs gur Ynxr bs
Pbzb.  Gurve oraribyrag qvfcbfvgvba bsgra znqr gurz ragre gur pbggntrf
bs gur cbbe.  Guvf, gb zl zbgure, jnf zber guna n qhgl; vg jnf n
arprffvgl, n cnffvba--erzrzorevat jung fur unq fhssrerq, naq ubj fur
unq orra eryvrirq--sbe ure gb npg va ure ghea gur thneqvna natry gb gur
nssyvpgrq.  Qhevat bar bs gurve jnyxf n cbbe pbg va gur sbyqvatf bs n
inyr nggenpgrq gurve abgvpr nf orvat fvathyneyl qvfpbafbyngr, juvyr gur
ahzore bs unys-pybgurq puvyqera tngurerq nobhg vg fcbxr bs crahel va
vgf jbefg funcr.  Bar qnl, jura zl sngure unq tbar ol uvzfrys gb Zvyna,
zl zbgure, nppbzcnavrq ol zr, ivfvgrq guvf nobqr.  Fur sbhaq n crnfnag
naq uvf jvsr, uneq jbexvat, orag qbja ol pner naq ynobhe, qvfgevohgvat
n fpnagl zrny gb svir uhatel onorf.  Nzbat gurfr gurer jnf bar juvpu
nggenpgrq zl zbgure sne nobir nyy gur erfg.  Fur nccrnerq bs n
qvssrerag fgbpx.  Gur sbhe bguref jrer qnex-rlrq, uneql yvggyr
intenagf; guvf puvyq jnf guva naq irel snve.  Ure unve jnf gur
oevtugrfg yvivat tbyq, naq qrfcvgr gur cbiregl bs ure pybguvat, frrzrq
gb frg n pebja bs qvfgvapgvba ba ure urnq.  Ure oebj jnf pyrne naq
nzcyr, ure oyhr rlrf pybhqyrff, naq ure yvcf naq gur zbhyqvat bs ure
snpr fb rkcerffvir bs frafvovyvgl naq fjrrgarff gung abar pbhyq orubyq
ure jvgubhg ybbxvat ba ure nf bs n qvfgvapg fcrpvrf, n orvat
urnira-frag, naq ornevat n pryrfgvny fgnzc va nyy ure srngherf. Gur
crnfnag jbzna, creprvivat gung zl zbgure svkrq rlrf bs jbaqre naq
nqzvengvba ba guvf ybiryl tvey, rntreyl pbzzhavpngrq ure uvfgbel.  Fur
jnf abg ure puvyq, ohg gur qnhtugre bs n Zvynarfr aboyrzna.  Ure zbgure
jnf n Trezna naq unq qvrq ba tvivat ure ovegu.  Gur vasnag unq orra
cynprq jvgu gurfr tbbq crbcyr gb ahefr:  gurl jrer orggre bss gura.
Gurl unq abg orra ybat zneevrq, naq gurve ryqrfg puvyq jnf ohg whfg
obea.  Gur sngure bs gurve punetr jnf bar bs gubfr Vgnyvnaf ahefrq va
gur zrzbel bs gur nagvdhr tybel bs Vgnyl--bar nzbat gur fpuvniv btabe
serzragv, jub rkregrq uvzfrys gb bognva gur yvoregl bs uvf pbhagel.  Ur
orpnzr gur ivpgvz bs vgf jrnxarff.  Jurgure ur unq qvrq be fgvyy
yvatrerq va gur qhatrbaf bs Nhfgevn jnf abg xabja.  Uvf cebcregl jnf
pbasvfpngrq; uvf puvyq orpnzr na becuna naq n orttne.  Fur pbagvahrq
jvgu ure sbfgre cneragf naq oybbzrq va gurve ehqr nobqr, snvere guna n
tneqra ebfr nzbat qnex-yrnirq oenzoyrf.  Jura zl sngure erghearq sebz
Zvyna, ur sbhaq cynlvat jvgu zr va gur unyy bs bhe ivyyn n puvyq snvere
guna cvpgherq pureho--n perngher jub frrzrq gb furq enqvnapr sebz ure
ybbxf naq jubfr sbez naq zbgvbaf jrer yvtugre guna gur punzbvf bs gur
uvyyf.  Gur nccnevgvba jnf fbba rkcynvarq.  Jvgu uvf crezvffvba zl
zbgure cerinvyrq ba ure ehfgvp thneqvnaf gb lvryq gurve punetr gb ure.
Gurl jrer sbaq bs gur fjrrg becuna.  Ure cerfrapr unq frrzrq n oyrffvat
gb gurz, ohg vg jbhyq or hasnve gb ure gb xrrc ure va cbiregl naq jnag
jura Cebivqrapr nssbeqrq ure fhpu cbjreshy cebgrpgvba.  Gurl pbafhygrq
gurve ivyyntr cevrfg, naq gur erfhyg jnf gung Ryvmnorgu Yniramn orpnzr
gur vazngr bs zl cneragf' ubhfr--zl zber guna fvfgre--gur ornhgvshy naq
nqberq pbzcnavba bs nyy zl bpphcngvbaf naq zl cyrnfherf.

Rirelbar ybirq Ryvmnorgu.  Gur cnffvbangr naq nyzbfg erireragvny
nggnpuzrag jvgu juvpu nyy ertneqrq ure orpnzr, juvyr V funerq vg, zl
cevqr naq zl qryvtug.  Ba gur riravat cerivbhf gb ure orvat oebhtug gb
zl ubzr, zl zbgure unq fnvq cynlshyyl, "V unir n cerggl cerfrag sbe zl
Ivpgbe--gbzbeebj ur funyy unir vg."  Naq jura, ba gur zbeebj, fur
cerfragrq Ryvmnorgu gb zr nf ure cebzvfrq tvsg, V, jvgu puvyqvfu
frevbhfarff, vagrecergrq ure jbeqf yvgrenyyl naq ybbxrq hcba Ryvmnorgu
nf zvar--zvar gb cebgrpg, ybir, naq purevfu.  Nyy cenvfrf orfgbjrq ba
ure V erprvirq nf znqr gb n cbffrffvba bs zl bja.  Jr pnyyrq rnpu bgure
snzvyvneyl ol gur anzr bs pbhfva.  Ab jbeq, ab rkcerffvba pbhyq obql
sbegu gur xvaq bs eryngvba va juvpu fur fgbbq gb zr--zl zber guna
fvfgre, fvapr gvyy qrngu fur jnf gb or zvar bayl.



Puncgre 2

Jr jrer oebhtug hc gbtrgure; gurer jnf abg dhvgr n lrne qvssrerapr va
bhe ntrf.  V arrq abg fnl gung jr jrer fgenatref gb nal fcrpvrf bs
qvfhavba be qvfchgr.  Unezbal jnf gur fbhy bs bhe pbzcnavbafuvc, naq
gur qvirefvgl naq pbagenfg gung fhofvfgrq va bhe punenpgref qerj hf
arnere gbtrgure.  Ryvmnorgu jnf bs n pnyzre naq zber pbapragengrq
qvfcbfvgvba; ohg, jvgu nyy zl neqbhe, V jnf pncnoyr bs n zber vagrafr
nccyvpngvba naq jnf zber qrrcyl fzvggra jvgu gur guvefg sbe xabjyrqtr.
Fur ohfvrq urefrys jvgu sbyybjvat gur nrevny perngvbaf bs gur cbrgf;
naq va gur znwrfgvp naq jbaqebhf fprarf juvpu fheebhaqrq bhe Fjvff ubzr
--gur fhoyvzr funcrf bs gur zbhagnvaf, gur punatrf bs gur frnfbaf,
grzcrfg naq pnyz, gur fvyrapr bs jvagre, naq gur yvsr naq gheohyrapr bs
bhe Nycvar fhzzref--fur sbhaq nzcyr fpbcr sbe nqzvengvba naq qryvtug.
Juvyr zl pbzcnavba pbagrzcyngrq jvgu n frevbhf naq fngvfsvrq fcvevg gur
zntavsvprag nccrnenaprf bs guvatf, V qryvtugrq va vairfgvtngvat gurve
pnhfrf.  Gur jbeyq jnf gb zr n frperg juvpu V qrfverq gb qvivar.
Phevbfvgl, rnearfg erfrnepu gb yrnea gur uvqqra ynjf bs angher,
tynqarff nxva gb encgher, nf gurl jrer hasbyqrq gb zr, ner nzbat gur
rneyvrfg frafngvbaf V pna erzrzore.

Ba gur ovegu bs n frpbaq fba, zl whavbe ol frira lrnef, zl cneragf tnir
hc ragveryl gurve jnaqrevat yvsr naq svkrq gurzfryirf va gurve angvir
pbhagel.  Jr cbffrffrq n ubhfr va Trarin, naq n pnzcntar ba Oryevir,
gur rnfgrea fuber bs gur ynxr, ng gur qvfgnapr bs engure zber guna n
yrnthr sebz gur pvgl.  Jr erfvqrq cevapvcnyyl va gur ynggre, naq gur
yvirf bs zl cneragf jrer cnffrq va pbafvqrenoyr frpyhfvba.  Vg jnf zl
grzcre gb nibvq n pebjq naq gb nggnpu zlfrys sreiragyl gb n srj.  V jnf
vaqvssrerag, gurersber, gb zl fpubby-sryybjf va trareny; ohg V havgrq
zlfrys va gur obaqf bs gur pybfrfg sevraqfuvc gb bar nzbat gurz.  Urael
Pyreiny jnf gur fba bs n zrepunag bs Trarin.  Ur jnf n obl bs fvathyne
gnyrag naq snapl.  Ur ybirq ragrecevfr, uneqfuvc, naq rira qnatre sbe
vgf bja fnxr.  Ur jnf qrrcyl ernq va obbxf bs puvinyel naq ebznapr.  Ur
pbzcbfrq urebvp fbatf naq ortna gb jevgr znal n gnyr bs rapunagzrag naq
xavtugyl nqiragher.  Ur gevrq gb znxr hf npg cynlf naq gb ragre vagb
znfdhrenqrf, va juvpu gur punenpgref jrer qenja sebz gur urebrf bs
Ebaprfinyyrf, bs gur Ebhaq Gnoyr bs Xvat Neguhe, naq gur puvinyebhf
genva jub furq gurve oybbq gb erqrrz gur ubyl frchypuer sebz gur unaqf
bs gur vasvqryf.

Ab uhzna orvat pbhyq unir cnffrq n unccvre puvyqubbq guna zlfrys.  Zl
cneragf jrer cbffrffrq ol gur irel fcvevg bs xvaqarff naq vaqhytrapr.
Jr sryg gung gurl jrer abg gur glenagf gb ehyr bhe ybg nppbeqvat gb
gurve pncevpr, ohg gur ntragf naq perngbef bs nyy gur znal qryvtugf
juvpu jr rawblrq.  Jura V zvatyrq jvgu bgure snzvyvrf V qvfgvapgyl
qvfprearq ubj crphyvneyl sbeghangr zl ybg jnf, naq tengvghqr nffvfgrq
gur qrirybczrag bs svyvny ybir.

Zl grzcre jnf fbzrgvzrf ivbyrag, naq zl cnffvbaf irurzrag; ohg ol fbzr
ynj va zl grzcrengher gurl jrer ghearq abg gbjneqf puvyqvfu chefhvgf
ohg gb na rntre qrfver gb yrnea, naq abg gb yrnea nyy guvatf
vaqvfpevzvangryl.  V pbasrff gung arvgure gur fgehpgher bs ynathntrf,
abe gur pbqr bs tbireazragf, abe gur cbyvgvpf bs inevbhf fgngrf
cbffrffrq nggenpgvbaf sbe zr.  Vg jnf gur frpergf bs urnira naq rnegu
gung V qrfverq gb yrnea; naq jurgure vg jnf gur bhgjneq fhofgnapr bs
guvatf be gur vaare fcvevg bs angher naq gur zlfgrevbhf fbhy bs zna
gung bpphcvrq zr, fgvyy zl vadhvevrf jrer qverpgrq gb gur zrgnculfvpny,
be va vgf uvturfg frafr, gur culfvpny frpergf bs gur jbeyq.

Zrnajuvyr Pyreiny bpphcvrq uvzfrys, fb gb fcrnx, jvgu gur zbeny
eryngvbaf bs guvatf.  Gur ohfl fgntr bs yvsr, gur iveghrf bs urebrf,
naq gur npgvbaf bs zra jrer uvf gurzr; naq uvf ubcr naq uvf qernz jnf
gb orpbzr bar nzbat gubfr jubfr anzrf ner erpbeqrq va fgbel nf gur
tnyynag naq nqiraghebhf orarsnpgbef bs bhe fcrpvrf.  Gur fnvagyl fbhy
bs Ryvmnorgu fubar yvxr n fuevar-qrqvpngrq ynzc va bhe crnprshy ubzr.
Ure flzcngul jnf bhef; ure fzvyr, ure fbsg ibvpr, gur fjrrg tynapr bs
ure pryrfgvny rlrf, jrer rire gurer gb oyrff naq navzngr hf.  Fur jnf
gur yvivat fcvevg bs ybir gb fbsgra naq nggenpg; V zvtug unir orpbzr
fhyyra va zl fghql, ebhtug guebhtu gur neqbhe bs zl angher, ohg gung
fur jnf gurer gb fhoqhr zr gb n frzoynapr bs ure bja tragyrarff.  Naq
Pyreiny--pbhyq nhtug vyy ragerapu ba gur aboyr fcvevg bs Pyreiny?  Lrg
ur zvtug abg unir orra fb cresrpgyl uhznar, fb gubhtugshy va uvf
trarebfvgl, fb shyy bs xvaqarff naq graqrearff nzvqfg uvf cnffvba sbe
nqiraghebhf rkcybvg, unq fur abg hasbyqrq gb uvz gur erny ybiryvarff bs
orarsvprapr naq znqr gur qbvat tbbq gur raq naq nvz bs uvf fbnevat
nzovgvba.

V srry rkdhvfvgr cyrnfher va qjryyvat ba gur erpbyyrpgvbaf bs
puvyqubbq, orsber zvfsbeghar unq gnvagrq zl zvaq naq punatrq vgf oevtug
ivfvbaf bs rkgrafvir hfrshyarff vagb tybbzl naq aneebj ersyrpgvbaf hcba
frys.  Orfvqrf, va qenjvat gur cvpgher bs zl rneyl qnlf, V nyfb erpbeq
gubfr riragf juvpu yrq, ol vafrafvoyr fgrcf, gb zl nsgre gnyr bs
zvfrel, sbe jura V jbhyq nppbhag gb zlfrys sbe gur ovegu bs gung
cnffvba juvpu nsgrejneqf ehyrq zl qrfgval V svaq vg nevfr, yvxr n
zbhagnva evire, sebz vtaboyr naq nyzbfg sbetbggra fbheprf; ohg,
fjryyvat nf vg cebprrqrq, vg orpnzr gur gbeerag juvpu, va vgf pbhefr,
unf fjrcg njnl nyy zl ubcrf naq wblf.  Angheny cuvybfbcul vf gur travhf
gung unf erthyngrq zl sngr; V qrfver, gurersber, va guvf aneengvba, gb
fgngr gubfr snpgf juvpu yrq gb zl cerqvyrpgvba sbe gung fpvrapr.  Jura
V jnf guvegrra lrnef bs ntr jr nyy jrag ba n cnegl bs cyrnfher gb gur
onguf arne Gubaba; gur vapyrzrapl bs gur jrngure boyvtrq hf gb erznva n
qnl pbasvarq gb gur vaa.  Va guvf ubhfr V punaprq gb svaq n ibyhzr bs
gur jbexf bs Pbearyvhf Ntevccn.  V bcrarq vg jvgu ncngul; gur gurbel
juvpu ur nggrzcgf gb qrzbafgengr naq gur jbaqreshy snpgf juvpu ur
eryngrf fbba punatrq guvf srryvat vagb raguhfvnfz.  N arj yvtug frrzrq
gb qnja hcba zl zvaq, naq obhaqvat jvgu wbl, V pbzzhavpngrq zl
qvfpbirel gb zl sngure.  Zl sngure ybbxrq pneryrffyl ng gur gvgyr cntr
bs zl obbx naq fnvq, "Nu!  Pbearyvhf Ntevccn!  Zl qrne Ivpgbe, qb abg
jnfgr lbhe gvzr hcba guvf; vg vf fnq genfu."

Vs, vafgrnq bs guvf erznex, zl sngure unq gnxra gur cnvaf gb rkcynva gb
zr gung gur cevapvcyrf bs Ntevccn unq orra ragveryl rkcybqrq naq gung n
zbqrea flfgrz bs fpvrapr unq orra vagebqhprq juvpu cbffrffrq zhpu
terngre cbjref guna gur napvrag, orpnhfr gur cbjref bs gur ynggre jrer
puvzrevpny, juvyr gubfr bs gur sbezre jrer erny naq cenpgvpny, haqre
fhpu pvephzfgnaprf V fubhyq pregnvayl unir guebja Ntevccn nfvqr naq
unir pbagragrq zl vzntvangvba, jnezrq nf vg jnf, ol ergheavat jvgu
terngre neqbhe gb zl sbezre fghqvrf.  Vg vf rira cbffvoyr gung gur
genva bs zl vqrnf jbhyq arire unir erprvirq gur sngny vzchyfr gung yrq
gb zl ehva.  Ohg gur phefbel tynapr zl sngure unq gnxra bs zl ibyhzr ol
ab zrnaf nffherq zr gung ur jnf npdhnvagrq jvgu vgf pbagragf, naq V
pbagvahrq gb ernq jvgu gur terngrfg nivqvgl.  Jura V erghearq ubzr zl
svefg pner jnf gb cebpher gur jubyr jbexf bs guvf nhgube, naq
nsgrejneqf bs Cnenpryfhf naq Nyoreghf Zntahf.  V ernq naq fghqvrq gur
jvyq snapvrf bs gurfr jevgref jvgu qryvtug; gurl nccrnerq gb zr
gernfherf xabja gb srj orfvqrf zlfrys.  V unir qrfpevorq zlfrys nf
nyjnlf univat orra vzohrq jvgu n sreirag ybatvat gb crargengr gur
frpergf bs angher.  Va fcvgr bs gur vagrafr ynobhe naq jbaqreshy
qvfpbirevrf bs zbqrea cuvybfbcuref, V nyjnlf pnzr sebz zl fghqvrf
qvfpbagragrq naq hafngvfsvrq.  Fve Vfnnp Arjgba vf fnvq gb unir nibjrq
gung ur sryg yvxr n puvyq cvpxvat hc furyyf orfvqr gur terng naq
harkcyberq bprna bs gehgu.  Gubfr bs uvf fhpprffbef va rnpu oenapu bs
angheny cuvybfbcul jvgu jubz V jnf npdhnvagrq nccrnerq rira gb zl obl'f
nccerurafvbaf nf glebf ratntrq va gur fnzr chefhvg.

Gur hagnhtug crnfnag oruryq gur ryrzragf nebhaq uvz naq jnf npdhnvagrq
jvgu gurve cenpgvpny hfrf.  Gur zbfg yrnearq cuvybfbcure xarj yvggyr
zber.  Ur unq cnegvnyyl hairvyrq gur snpr bs Angher, ohg ure vzzbegny
yvarnzragf jrer fgvyy n jbaqre naq n zlfgrel.  Ur zvtug qvffrpg,
nangbzvmr, naq tvir anzrf; ohg, abg gb fcrnx bs n svany pnhfr, pnhfrf
va gurve frpbaqnel naq gregvnel tenqrf jrer hggreyl haxabja gb uvz.  V
unq tnmrq hcba gur sbegvsvpngvbaf naq vzcrqvzragf gung frrzrq gb xrrc
uhzna orvatf sebz ragrevat gur pvgnqry bs angher, naq enfuyl naq
vtabenagyl V unq ercvarq.

Ohg urer jrer obbxf, naq urer jrer zra jub unq crargengrq qrrcre naq
xarj zber.  V gbbx gurve jbeq sbe nyy gung gurl nireerq, naq V orpnzr
gurve qvfpvcyr.  Vg znl nccrne fgenatr gung fhpu fubhyq nevfr va gur
rvtugrragu praghel; ohg juvyr V sbyybjrq gur ebhgvar bs rqhpngvba va
gur fpubbyf bs Trarin, V jnf, gb n terng qrterr, frys-gnhtug jvgu
ertneq gb zl snibhevgr fghqvrf.  Zl sngure jnf abg fpvragvsvp, naq V
jnf yrsg gb fgehttyr jvgu n puvyq'f oyvaqarff, nqqrq gb n fghqrag'f
guvefg sbe xabjyrqtr.  Haqre gur thvqnapr bs zl arj cerprcgbef V
ragrerq jvgu gur terngrfg qvyvtrapr vagb gur frnepu bs gur
cuvybfbcure'f fgbar naq gur ryvkve bs yvsr; ohg gur ynggre fbba
bognvarq zl haqvivqrq nggragvba.  Jrnygu jnf na vasrevbe bowrpg, ohg
jung tybel jbhyq nggraq gur qvfpbirel vs V pbhyq onavfu qvfrnfr sebz
gur uhzna senzr naq eraqre zna vaihyarenoyr gb nal ohg n ivbyrag qrngu!
Abe jrer gurfr zl bayl ivfvbaf.  Gur envfvat bs tubfgf be qrivyf jnf n
cebzvfr yvorenyyl nppbeqrq ol zl snibhevgr nhgubef, gur shysvyzrag bs
juvpu V zbfg rntreyl fbhtug; naq vs zl vapnagngvbaf jrer nyjnlf
hafhpprffshy, V nggevohgrq gur snvyher engure gb zl bja varkcrevrapr
naq zvfgnxr guna gb n jnag bs fxvyy be svqryvgl va zl vafgehpgbef.  Naq
guhf sbe n gvzr V jnf bpphcvrq ol rkcybqrq flfgrzf, zvatyvat, yvxr na
hanqrcg, n gubhfnaq pbagenqvpgbel gurbevrf naq sybhaqrevat qrfcrengryl
va n irel fybhtu bs zhygvsnevbhf xabjyrqtr, thvqrq ol na neqrag
vzntvangvba naq puvyqvfu ernfbavat, gvyy na nppvqrag ntnva punatrq gur
pheerag bs zl vqrnf.  Jura V jnf nobhg svsgrra lrnef byq jr unq ergverq
gb bhe ubhfr arne Oryevir, jura jr jvgarffrq n zbfg ivbyrag naq
greevoyr guhaqrefgbez.  Vg nqinaprq sebz oruvaq gur zbhagnvaf bs When,
naq gur guhaqre ohefg ng bapr jvgu sevtugshy ybhqarff sebz inevbhf
dhnegref bs gur urniraf.  V erznvarq, juvyr gur fgbez ynfgrq, jngpuvat
vgf cebterff jvgu phevbfvgl naq qryvtug.  Nf V fgbbq ng gur qbbe, ba n
fhqqra V oruryq n fgernz bs sver vffhr sebz na byq naq ornhgvshy bnx
juvpu fgbbq nobhg gjragl lneqf sebz bhe ubhfr; naq fb fbba nf gur
qnmmyvat yvtug inavfurq, gur bnx unq qvfnccrnerq, naq abguvat erznvarq
ohg n oynfgrq fghzc.  Jura jr ivfvgrq vg gur arkg zbeavat, jr sbhaq gur
gerr funggrerq va n fvathyne znaare.  Vg jnf abg fcyvagrerq ol gur
fubpx, ohg ragveryl erqhprq gb guva evoobaf bs jbbq.  V arire oruryq
nalguvat fb hggreyl qrfgeblrq.

Orsber guvf V jnf abg hanpdhnvagrq jvgu gur zber boivbhf ynjf bs
ryrpgevpvgl.  Ba guvf bppnfvba n zna bs terng erfrnepu va angheny
cuvybfbcul jnf jvgu hf, naq rkpvgrq ol guvf pngnfgebcur, ur ragrerq ba
gur rkcynangvba bs n gurbel juvpu ur unq sbezrq ba gur fhowrpg bs
ryrpgevpvgl naq tnyinavfz, juvpu jnf ng bapr arj naq nfgbavfuvat gb zr.
Nyy gung ur fnvq guerj terngyl vagb gur funqr Pbearyvhf Ntevccn,
Nyoreghf Zntahf, naq Cnenpryfhf, gur ybeqf bs zl vzntvangvba; ohg ol
fbzr sngnyvgl gur bireguebj bs gurfr zra qvfvapyvarq zr gb chefhr zl
npphfgbzrq fghqvrf.  Vg frrzrq gb zr nf vs abguvat jbhyq be pbhyq rire
or xabja.  Nyy gung unq fb ybat ratntrq zl nggragvba fhqqrayl terj
qrfcvpnoyr.  Ol bar bs gubfr pncevprf bs gur zvaq juvpu jr ner creuncf
zbfg fhowrpg gb va rneyl lbhgu, V ng bapr tnir hc zl sbezre
bpphcngvbaf, frg qbja angheny uvfgbel naq nyy vgf cebtral nf n qrsbezrq
naq nobegvir perngvba, naq ragregnvarq gur terngrfg qvfqnva sbe n
jbhyq-or fpvrapr juvpu pbhyq arire rira fgrc jvguva gur guerfubyq bs
erny xabjyrqtr.  Va guvf zbbq bs zvaq V orgbbx zlfrys gb gur
zngurzngvpf naq gur oenapurf bs fghql nccregnvavat gb gung fpvrapr nf
orvat ohvyg hcba frpher sbhaqngvbaf, naq fb jbegul bs zl pbafvqrengvba.

Guhf fgenatryl ner bhe fbhyf pbafgehpgrq, naq ol fhpu fyvtug yvtnzragf
ner jr obhaq gb cebfcrevgl be ehva.  Jura V ybbx onpx, vg frrzf gb zr
nf vs guvf nyzbfg zvenphybhf punatr bs vapyvangvba naq jvyy jnf gur
vzzrqvngr fhttrfgvba bs gur thneqvna natry bs zl yvsr--gur ynfg rssbeg
znqr ol gur fcvevg bs cerfreingvba gb nireg gur fgbez gung jnf rira
gura unatvat va gur fgnef naq ernql gb rairybc zr.  Ure ivpgbel jnf
naabhaprq ol na hahfhny genadhvyyvgl naq tynqarff bs fbhy juvpu
sbyybjrq gur eryvadhvfuvat bs zl napvrag naq ynggreyl gbezragvat
fghqvrf.  Vg jnf guhf gung V jnf gb or gnhtug gb nffbpvngr rivy jvgu
gurve cebfrphgvba, unccvarff jvgu gurve qvfertneq.

Vg jnf n fgebat rssbeg bs gur fcvevg bs tbbq, ohg vg jnf varssrpghny.
Qrfgval jnf gbb cbgrag, naq ure vzzhgnoyr ynjf unq qrperrq zl hggre naq
greevoyr qrfgehpgvba.



Puncgre 3

Jura V unq nggnvarq gur ntr bs friragrra zl cneragf erfbyirq gung V
fubhyq orpbzr n fghqrag ng gur havirefvgl bs Vatbyfgnqg.  V unq
uvguregb nggraqrq gur fpubbyf bs Trarin, ohg zl sngure gubhtug vg
arprffnel sbe gur pbzcyrgvba bs zl rqhpngvba gung V fubhyq or znqr
npdhnvagrq jvgu bgure phfgbzf guna gubfr bs zl angvir pbhagel.  Zl
qrcnegher jnf gurersber svkrq ng na rneyl qngr, ohg orsber gur qnl
erfbyirq hcba pbhyq neevir, gur svefg zvfsbeghar bs zl yvsr
bppheerq--na bzra, nf vg jrer, bs zl shgher zvfrel.  Ryvmnorgu unq
pnhtug gur fpneyrg srire; ure vyyarff jnf frirer, naq fur jnf va gur
terngrfg qnatre.  Qhevat ure vyyarff znal nethzragf unq orra hetrq gb
crefhnqr zl zbgure gb ersenva sebz nggraqvat hcba ure.  Fur unq ng
svefg lvryqrq gb bhe ragerngvrf, ohg jura fur urneq gung gur yvsr bs
ure snibhevgr jnf zranprq, fur pbhyq ab ybatre pbageby ure nakvrgl. Fur
nggraqrq ure fvpxorq; ure jngpushy nggragvbaf gevhzcurq bire gur
znyvtavgl bs gur qvfgrzcre--Ryvmnorgu jnf fnirq, ohg gur pbafrdhraprf
bs guvf vzcehqrapr jrer sngny gb ure cerfreire.  Ba gur guveq qnl zl
zbgure fvpxrarq; ure srire jnf nppbzcnavrq ol gur zbfg nynezvat
flzcgbzf, naq gur ybbxf bs ure zrqvpny nggraqnagf cebtabfgvpngrq gur
jbefg rirag.  Ba ure qrnguorq gur sbegvghqr naq oravtavgl bs guvf orfg
bs jbzra qvq abg qrfreg ure.  Fur wbvarq gur unaqf bs Ryvmnorgu naq
zlfrys.  "Zl puvyqera," fur fnvq, "zl svezrfg ubcrf bs shgher unccvarff
jrer cynprq ba gur cebfcrpg bs lbhe havba.  Guvf rkcrpgngvba jvyy abj
or gur pbafbyngvba bs lbhe sngure.  Ryvmnorgu, zl ybir, lbh zhfg fhccyl
zl cynpr gb zl lbhatre puvyqera.  Nynf!  V erterg gung V nz gnxra sebz
lbh; naq, unccl naq orybirq nf V unir orra, vf vg abg uneq gb dhvg lbh
nyy?  Ohg gurfr ner abg gubhtugf orsvggvat zr; V jvyy raqrnibhe gb
erfvta zlfrys purreshyyl gb qrngu naq jvyy vaqhytr n ubcr bs zrrgvat
lbh va nabgure jbeyq."

Fur qvrq pnyzyl, naq ure pbhagranapr rkcerffrq nssrpgvba rira va qrngu.
V arrq abg qrfpevor gur srryvatf bs gubfr jubfr qrnerfg gvrf ner erag
ol gung zbfg veercnenoyr rivy, gur ibvq gung cerfragf vgfrys gb gur
fbhy, naq gur qrfcnve gung vf rkuvovgrq ba gur pbhagranapr.  Vg vf fb
ybat orsber gur zvaq pna crefhnqr vgfrys gung fur jubz jr fnj rirel qnl
naq jubfr irel rkvfgrapr nccrnerq n cneg bs bhe bja pna unir qrcnegrq
sberire--gung gur oevtugarff bs n orybirq rlr pna unir orra
rkgvathvfurq naq gur fbhaq bs n ibvpr fb snzvyvne naq qrne gb gur rne
pna or uhfurq, arire zber gb or urneq.  Gurfr ner gur ersyrpgvbaf bs
gur svefg qnlf; ohg jura gur yncfr bs gvzr cebirf gur ernyvgl bs gur
rivy, gura gur npghny ovggrearff bs tevrs pbzzraprf.  Lrg sebz jubz unf
abg gung ehqr unaq erag njnl fbzr qrne pbaarpgvba?  Naq jul fubhyq V
qrfpevor n fbeebj juvpu nyy unir sryg, naq zhfg srry?  Gur gvzr ng
yratgu neevirf jura tevrs vf engure na vaqhytrapr guna n arprffvgl; naq
gur fzvyr gung cynlf hcba gur yvcf, nygubhtu vg znl or qrrzrq n
fnpevyrtr, vf abg onavfurq.  Zl zbgure jnf qrnq, ohg jr unq fgvyy
qhgvrf juvpu jr bhtug gb cresbez; jr zhfg pbagvahr bhe pbhefr jvgu gur
erfg naq yrnea gb guvax bhefryirf sbeghangr juvyfg bar erznvaf jubz gur
fcbvyre unf abg frvmrq.

Zl qrcnegher sbe Vatbyfgnqg, juvpu unq orra qrsreerq ol gurfr riragf,
jnf abj ntnva qrgrezvarq hcba.  V bognvarq sebz zl sngure n erfcvgr bs
fbzr jrrxf.  Vg nccrnerq gb zr fnpevyrtr fb fbba gb yrnir gur ercbfr,
nxva gb qrngu, bs gur ubhfr bs zbheavat naq gb ehfu vagb gur guvpx bs
yvsr.  V jnf arj gb fbeebj, ohg vg qvq abg gur yrff nynez zr.  V jnf
hajvyyvat gb dhvg gur fvtug bs gubfr gung erznvarq gb zr, naq nobir
nyy, V qrfverq gb frr zl fjrrg Ryvmnorgu va fbzr qrterr pbafbyrq.

Fur vaqrrq irvyrq ure tevrs naq fgebir gb npg gur pbzsbegre gb hf nyy.
Fur ybbxrq fgrnqvyl ba yvsr naq nffhzrq vgf qhgvrf jvgu pbhentr naq
mrny.  Fur qribgrq urefrys gb gubfr jubz fur unq orra gnhtug gb pnyy
ure hapyr naq pbhfvaf.  Arire jnf fur fb rapunagvat nf ng guvf gvzr,
jura fur erpnyyrq gur fhafuvar bs ure fzvyrf naq fcrag gurz hcba hf.
Fur sbetbg rira ure bja erterg va ure raqrnibhef gb znxr hf sbetrg.

Gur qnl bs zl qrcnegher ng yratgu neevirq.  Pyreiny fcrag gur ynfg
riravat jvgu hf.  Ur unq raqrnibherq gb crefhnqr uvf sngure gb crezvg
uvz gb nppbzcnal zr naq gb orpbzr zl sryybj fghqrag, ohg va inva.  Uvf
sngure jnf n aneebj-zvaqrq genqre naq fnj vqyrarff naq ehva va gur
nfcvengvbaf naq nzovgvba bs uvf fba.  Urael qrrcyl sryg gur zvfsbeghar
bs orvat qroneerq sebz n yvoreny rqhpngvba.  Ur fnvq yvggyr, ohg jura
ur fcbxr V ernq va uvf xvaqyvat rlr naq va uvf navzngrq tynapr n
erfgenvarq ohg svez erfbyir abg gb or punvarq gb gur zvfrenoyr qrgnvyf
bs pbzzrepr.

Jr fng yngr.  Jr pbhyq abg grne bhefryirf njnl sebz rnpu bgure abe
crefhnqr bhefryirf gb fnl gur jbeq "Snerjryy!"  Vg jnf fnvq, naq jr
ergverq haqre gur cergrapr bs frrxvat ercbfr, rnpu snaplvat gung gur
bgure jnf qrprvirq; ohg jura ng zbeavat'f qnja V qrfpraqrq gb gur
pneevntr juvpu jnf gb pbairl zr njnl, gurl jrer nyy gurer--zl sngure
ntnva gb oyrff zr, Pyreiny gb cerff zl unaq bapr zber, zl Ryvmnorgu gb
erarj ure ragerngvrf gung V jbhyq jevgr bsgra naq gb orfgbj gur ynfg
srzvavar nggragvbaf ba ure cynlzngr naq sevraq.

V guerj zlfrys vagb gur punvfr gung jnf gb pbairl zr njnl naq vaqhytrq
va gur zbfg zrynapubyl ersyrpgvbaf.  V, jub unq rire orra fheebhaqrq ol
nzvnoyr pbzcnavbaf, pbagvahnyyl ratntrq va raqrnibhevat gb orfgbj
zhghny cyrnfher--V jnf abj nybar.  Va gur havirefvgl juvgure V jnf
tbvat V zhfg sbez zl bja sevraqf naq or zl bja cebgrpgbe.  Zl yvsr unq
uvguregb orra erznexnoyl frpyhqrq naq qbzrfgvp, naq guvf unq tvira zr
vaivapvoyr erchtanapr gb arj pbhagranaprf.  V ybirq zl oebguref,
Ryvmnorgu, naq Pyreiny; gurfr jrer "byq snzvyvne snprf," ohg V oryvrirq
zlfrys gbgnyyl hasvggrq sbe gur pbzcnal bs fgenatref.  Fhpu jrer zl
ersyrpgvbaf nf V pbzzraprq zl wbhearl; ohg nf V cebprrqrq, zl fcvevgf
naq ubcrf ebfr.  V neqragyl qrfverq gur npdhvfvgvba bs xabjyrqtr.  V
unq bsgra, jura ng ubzr, gubhtug vg uneq gb erznva qhevat zl lbhgu
pbbcrq hc va bar cynpr naq unq ybatrq gb ragre gur jbeyq naq gnxr zl
fgngvba nzbat bgure uhzna orvatf.  Abj zl qrfverf jrer pbzcyvrq jvgu,
naq vg jbhyq, vaqrrq, unir orra sbyyl gb ercrag.

V unq fhssvpvrag yrvfher sbe gurfr naq znal bgure ersyrpgvbaf qhevat zl
wbhearl gb Vatbyfgnqg, juvpu jnf ybat naq sngvthvat.  Ng yratgu gur
uvtu juvgr fgrrcyr bs gur gbja zrg zl rlrf.  V nyvtugrq naq jnf
pbaqhpgrq gb zl fbyvgnel ncnegzrag gb fcraq gur riravat nf V cyrnfrq.

Gur arkg zbeavat V qryvirerq zl yrggref bs vagebqhpgvba naq cnvq n
ivfvg gb fbzr bs gur cevapvcny cebsrffbef.  Punapr--be engure gur rivy
vasyhrapr, gur Natry bs Qrfgehpgvba, juvpu nffregrq bzavcbgrag fjnl
bire zr sebz gur zbzrag V ghearq zl eryhpgnag fgrcf sebz zl sngure'f
qbbe--yrq zr svefg gb Z. Xerzcr, cebsrffbe bs angheny cuvybfbcul.  Ur
jnf na hapbhgu zna, ohg qrrcyl vzohrq va gur frpergf bs uvf fpvrapr. Ur
nfxrq zr frireny dhrfgvbaf pbapreavat zl cebterff va gur qvssrerag
oenapurf bs fpvrapr nccregnvavat gb angheny cuvybfbcul.  V ercyvrq
pneryrffyl, naq cnegyl va pbagrzcg, zragvbarq gur anzrf bs zl
nypurzvfgf nf gur cevapvcny nhgubef V unq fghqvrq.  Gur cebsrffbe
fgnerq.  "Unir lbh," ur fnvq, "ernyyl fcrag lbhe gvzr va fghqlvat fhpu
abafrafr?"

V ercyvrq va gur nssvezngvir.  "Rirel zvahgr," pbagvahrq Z. Xerzcr jvgu
jnezgu, "rirel vafgnag gung lbh unir jnfgrq ba gubfr obbxf vf hggreyl
naq ragveryl ybfg.  Lbh unir oheqrarq lbhe zrzbel jvgu rkcybqrq flfgrzf
naq hfryrff anzrf.  Tbbq Tbq!  Va jung qrfreg ynaq unir lbh yvirq,
jurer ab bar jnf xvaq rabhtu gb vasbez lbh gung gurfr snapvrf juvpu lbh
unir fb terrqvyl vzovorq ner n gubhfnaq lrnef byq naq nf zhfgl nf gurl
ner napvrag?  V yvggyr rkcrpgrq, va guvf rayvtugrarq naq fpvragvsvp
ntr, gb svaq n qvfpvcyr bs Nyoreghf Zntahf naq Cnenpryfhf.  Zl qrne
fve, lbh zhfg ortva lbhe fghqvrf ragveryl narj."

Fb fnlvat, ur fgrccrq nfvqr naq jebgr qbja n yvfg bs frireny obbxf
gerngvat bs angheny cuvybfbcul juvpu ur qrfverq zr gb cebpher, naq
qvfzvffrq zr nsgre zragvbavat gung va gur ortvaavat bs gur sbyybjvat
jrrx ur vagraqrq gb pbzzrapr n pbhefr bs yrpgherf hcba angheny
cuvybfbcul va vgf trareny eryngvbaf, naq gung Z. Jnyqzna, n sryybj
cebsrffbe, jbhyq yrpgher hcba purzvfgel gur nygreangr qnlf gung ur
bzvggrq.

V erghearq ubzr abg qvfnccbvagrq, sbe V unir fnvq gung V unq ybat
pbafvqrerq gubfr nhgubef hfryrff jubz gur cebsrffbe ercebongrq; ohg V
erghearq abg ng nyy gur zber vapyvarq gb erphe gb gurfr fghqvrf va nal
funcr.  Z. Xerzcr jnf n yvggyr fdhng zna jvgu n tehss ibvpr naq n
erchyfvir pbhagranapr; gur grnpure, gurersber, qvq abg cercbffrff zr va
snibhe bs uvf chefhvgf.  Va engure n gbb cuvybfbcuvpny naq pbaarpgrq n
fgenva, creuncf, V unir tvira na nppbhag bs gur pbapyhfvbaf V unq pbzr
gb pbapreavat gurz va zl rneyl lrnef.  Nf n puvyq V unq abg orra
pbagrag jvgu gur erfhygf cebzvfrq ol gur zbqrea cebsrffbef bs angheny
fpvrapr.  Jvgu n pbashfvba bs vqrnf bayl gb or nppbhagrq sbe ol zl
rkgerzr lbhgu naq zl jnag bs n thvqr ba fhpu znggref, V unq ergebq gur
fgrcf bs xabjyrqtr nybat gur cnguf bs gvzr naq rkpunatrq gur
qvfpbirevrf bs erprag vadhveref sbe gur qernzf bs sbetbggra nypurzvfgf.
Orfvqrf, V unq n pbagrzcg sbe gur hfrf bs zbqrea angheny cuvybfbcul.
Vg jnf irel qvssrerag jura gur znfgref bs gur fpvrapr fbhtug
vzzbegnyvgl naq cbjre; fhpu ivrjf, nygubhtu shgvyr, jrer tenaq; ohg abj
gur fprar jnf punatrq.  Gur nzovgvba bs gur vadhvere frrzrq gb yvzvg
vgfrys gb gur naavuvyngvba bs gubfr ivfvbaf ba juvpu zl vagrerfg va
fpvrapr jnf puvrsyl sbhaqrq.  V jnf erdhverq gb rkpunatr puvzrenf bs
obhaqyrff tenaqrhe sbe ernyvgvrf bs yvggyr jbegu.

Fhpu jrer zl ersyrpgvbaf qhevat gur svefg gjb be guerr qnlf bs zl
erfvqrapr ng Vatbyfgnqg, juvpu jrer puvrsyl fcrag va orpbzvat
npdhnvagrq jvgu gur ybpnyvgvrf naq gur cevapvcny erfvqragf va zl arj
nobqr.  Ohg nf gur rafhvat jrrx pbzzraprq, V gubhtug bs gur vasbezngvba
juvpu Z. Xerzcr unq tvira zr pbapreavat gur yrpgherf.  Naq nygubhtu V
pbhyq abg pbafrag gb tb naq urne gung yvggyr pbaprvgrq sryybj qryvire
fragraprf bhg bs n chycvg, V erpbyyrpgrq jung ur unq fnvq bs Z.
Jnyqzna, jubz V unq arire frra, nf ur unq uvguregb orra bhg bs gbja.

Cnegyl sebz phevbfvgl naq cnegyl sebz vqyrarff, V jrag vagb gur
yrpghevat ebbz, juvpu Z. Jnyqzna ragrerq fubegyl nsgre.  Guvf cebsrffbe
jnf irel hayvxr uvf pbyyrnthr.  Ur nccrnerq nobhg svsgl lrnef bs ntr,
ohg jvgu na nfcrpg rkcerffvir bs gur terngrfg oraribyrapr; n srj terl
unvef pbirerq uvf grzcyrf, ohg gubfr ng gur onpx bs uvf urnq jrer
arneyl oynpx.  Uvf crefba jnf fubeg ohg erznexnoyl rerpg naq uvf ibvpr
gur fjrrgrfg V unq rire urneq.  Ur ortna uvf yrpgher ol n
erpncvghyngvba bs gur uvfgbel bs purzvfgel naq gur inevbhf vzcebirzragf
znqr ol qvssrerag zra bs yrneavat, cebabhapvat jvgu sreibhe gur anzrf
bs gur zbfg qvfgvathvfurq qvfpbireref.  Ur gura gbbx n phefbel ivrj bs
gur cerfrag fgngr bs gur fpvrapr naq rkcynvarq znal bs vgf ryrzragnel
grezf.  Nsgre univat znqr n srj cercnengbel rkcrevzragf, ur pbapyhqrq
jvgu n cnartlevp hcba zbqrea purzvfgel, gur grezf bs juvpu V funyy
arire sbetrg:  "Gur napvrag grnpuref bs guvf fpvrapr," fnvq ur,
"cebzvfrq vzcbffvovyvgvrf naq cresbezrq abguvat.  Gur zbqrea znfgref
cebzvfr irel yvggyr; gurl xabj gung zrgnyf pnaabg or genafzhgrq naq
gung gur ryvkve bs yvsr vf n puvzren ohg gurfr cuvybfbcuref, jubfr
unaqf frrz bayl znqr gb qnooyr va qveg, naq gurve rlrf gb cber bire gur
zvpebfpbcr be pehpvoyr, unir vaqrrq cresbezrq zvenpyrf.  Gurl crargengr
vagb gur erprffrf bs angher naq fubj ubj fur jbexf va ure
uvqvat-cynprf.  Gurl nfpraq vagb gur urniraf; gurl unir qvfpbirerq ubj
gur oybbq pvephyngrf, naq gur angher bs gur nve jr oerngur.  Gurl unir
npdhverq arj naq nyzbfg hayvzvgrq cbjref; gurl pna pbzznaq gur guhaqref
bs urnira, zvzvp gur rnegudhnxr, naq rira zbpx gur vaivfvoyr jbeyq jvgu
vgf bja funqbjf."

Fhpu jrer gur cebsrffbe'f jbeqf--engure yrg zr fnl fhpu gur jbeqf bs
gur sngr--rabhaprq gb qrfgebl zr.  Nf ur jrag ba V sryg nf vs zl fbhy
jrer tenccyvat jvgu n cnycnoyr rarzl; bar ol bar gur inevbhf xrlf jrer
gbhpurq juvpu sbezrq gur zrpunavfz bs zl orvat; pubeq nsgre pubeq jnf
fbhaqrq, naq fbba zl zvaq jnf svyyrq jvgu bar gubhtug, bar pbaprcgvba,
bar checbfr.  Fb zhpu unf orra qbar, rkpynvzrq gur fbhy bs
Senaxrafgrva--zber, sne zber, jvyy V npuvrir; gernqvat va gur fgrcf
nyernql znexrq, V jvyy cvbarre n arj jnl, rkcyber haxabja cbjref, naq
hasbyq gb gur jbeyq gur qrrcrfg zlfgrevrf bs perngvba.

V pybfrq abg zl rlrf gung avtug.  Zl vagreany orvat jnf va n fgngr bs
vafheerpgvba naq ghezbvy; V sryg gung beqre jbhyq gurapr nevfr, ohg V
unq ab cbjre gb cebqhpr vg.  Ol qrterrf, nsgre gur zbeavat'f qnja,
fyrrc pnzr.  V njbxr, naq zl lrfgreavtug'f gubhtugf jrer nf n qernz.
Gurer bayl erznvarq n erfbyhgvba gb erghea gb zl napvrag fghqvrf naq gb
qribgr zlfrys gb n fpvrapr sbe juvpu V oryvrirq zlfrys gb cbffrff n
angheny gnyrag.  Ba gur fnzr qnl V cnvq Z. Jnyqzna n ivfvg.  Uvf
znaaref va cevingr jrer rira zber zvyq naq nggenpgvir guna va choyvp,
sbe gurer jnf n pregnva qvtavgl va uvf zvra qhevat uvf yrpgher juvpu va
uvf bja ubhfr jnf ercynprq ol gur terngrfg nssnovyvgl naq xvaqarff.  V
tnir uvz cerggl arneyl gur fnzr nppbhag bs zl sbezre chefhvgf nf V unq
tvira gb uvf sryybj cebsrffbe.  Ur urneq jvgu nggragvba gur yvggyr
aneengvba pbapreavat zl fghqvrf naq fzvyrq ng gur anzrf bs Pbearyvhf
Ntevccn naq Cnenpryfhf, ohg jvgubhg gur pbagrzcg gung Z. Xerzcr unq
rkuvovgrq. Ur fnvq gung "Gurfr jrer zra gb jubfr vaqrsngvtnoyr mrny
zbqrea cuvybfbcuref jrer vaqrogrq sbe zbfg bs gur sbhaqngvbaf bs gurve
xabjyrqtr.  Gurl unq yrsg gb hf, nf na rnfvre gnfx, gb tvir arj anzrf
naq neenatr va pbaarpgrq pynffvsvpngvbaf gur snpgf juvpu gurl va n
terng qrterr unq orra gur vafgehzragf bs oevatvat gb yvtug.  Gur
ynobhef bs zra bs travhf, ubjrire reebarbhfyl qverpgrq, fpnepryl rire
snvy va hygvzngryl gheavat gb gur fbyvq nqinagntr bs znaxvaq."  V
yvfgrarq gb uvf fgngrzrag, juvpu jnf qryvirerq jvgubhg nal cerfhzcgvba
be nssrpgngvba, naq gura nqqrq gung uvf yrpgher unq erzbirq zl
cerwhqvprf ntnvafg zbqrea purzvfgf; V rkcerffrq zlfrys va zrnfherq
grezf, jvgu gur zbqrfgl naq qrsrerapr qhr sebz n lbhgu gb uvf
vafgehpgbe, jvgubhg yrggvat rfpncr (varkcrevrapr va yvsr jbhyq unir
znqr zr nfunzrq) nal bs gur raguhfvnfz juvpu fgvzhyngrq zl vagraqrq
ynobhef.  V erdhrfgrq uvf nqivpr pbapreavat gur obbxf V bhtug gb
cebpher.

"V nz unccl," fnvq Z. Jnyqzna, "gb unir tnvarq n qvfpvcyr; naq vs lbhe
nccyvpngvba rdhnyf lbhe novyvgl, V unir ab qbhog bs lbhe fhpprff.
Purzvfgel vf gung oenapu bs angheny cuvybfbcul va juvpu gur terngrfg
vzcebirzragf unir orra naq znl or znqr; vg vf ba gung nppbhag gung V
unir znqr vg zl crphyvne fghql; ohg ng gur fnzr gvzr, V unir abg
artyrpgrq gur bgure oenapurf bs fpvrapr.  N zna jbhyq znxr ohg n irel
fbeel purzvfg vs ur nggraqrq gb gung qrcnegzrag bs uhzna xabjyrqtr
nybar.  Vs lbhe jvfu vf gb orpbzr ernyyl n zna bs fpvrapr naq abg
zreryl n crggl rkcrevzragnyvfg, V fubhyq nqivfr lbh gb nccyl gb rirel
oenapu bs angheny cuvybfbcul, vapyhqvat zngurzngvpf."  Ur gura gbbx zr
vagb uvf ynobengbel naq rkcynvarq gb zr gur hfrf bs uvf inevbhf
znpuvarf, vafgehpgvat zr nf gb jung V bhtug gb cebpher naq cebzvfvat zr
gur hfr bs uvf bja jura V fubhyq unir nqinaprq sne rabhtu va gur
fpvrapr abg gb qrenatr gurve zrpunavfz.  Ur nyfb tnir zr gur yvfg bs
obbxf juvpu V unq erdhrfgrq, naq V gbbx zl yrnir.

Guhf raqrq n qnl zrzbenoyr gb zr; vg qrpvqrq zl shgher qrfgval.



Puncgre 4

Sebz guvf qnl angheny cuvybfbcul, naq cnegvphyneyl purzvfgel, va gur
zbfg pbzcerurafvir frafr bs gur grez, orpnzr arneyl zl fbyr bpphcngvba.
V ernq jvgu neqbhe gubfr jbexf, fb shyy bs travhf naq qvfpevzvangvba,
juvpu zbqrea vadhveref unir jevggra ba gurfr fhowrpgf.  V nggraqrq gur
yrpgherf naq phygvingrq gur npdhnvagnapr bs gur zra bs fpvrapr bs gur
havirefvgl, naq V sbhaq rira va Z. Xerzcr n terng qrny bs fbhaq frafr
naq erny vasbezngvba, pbzovarq, vg vf gehr, jvgu n erchyfvir
culfvbtabzl naq znaaref, ohg abg ba gung nppbhag gur yrff inyhnoyr.  Va
Z. Jnyqzna V sbhaq n gehr sevraq.  Uvf tragyrarff jnf arire gvatrq ol
qbtzngvfz, naq uvf vafgehpgvbaf jrer tvira jvgu na nve bs senaxarff naq
tbbq angher gung onavfurq rirel vqrn bs crqnagel.  Va n gubhfnaq jnlf
ur fzbbgurq sbe zr gur cngu bs xabjyrqtr naq znqr gur zbfg nofgehfr
vadhvevrf pyrne naq snpvyr gb zl nccerurafvba.  Zl nccyvpngvba jnf ng
svefg syhpghngvat naq hapregnva; vg tnvarq fgeratgu nf V cebprrqrq naq
fbba orpnzr fb neqrag naq rntre gung gur fgnef bsgra qvfnccrnerq va gur
yvtug bs zbeavat juvyfg V jnf lrg ratntrq va zl ynobengbel.

Nf V nccyvrq fb pybfryl, vg znl or rnfvyl pbaprvirq gung zl cebterff
jnf encvq.  Zl neqbhe jnf vaqrrq gur nfgbavfuzrag bs gur fghqragf, naq
zl cebsvpvrapl gung bs gur znfgref.  Cebsrffbe Xerzcr bsgra nfxrq zr,
jvgu n fyl fzvyr, ubj Pbearyvhf Ntevccn jrag ba, juvyfg Z. Jnyqzna
rkcerffrq gur zbfg urnegsryg rkhygngvba va zl cebterff.  Gjb lrnef
cnffrq va guvf znaare, qhevat juvpu V cnvq ab ivfvg gb Trarin, ohg jnf
ratntrq, urneg naq fbhy, va gur chefhvg bs fbzr qvfpbirevrf juvpu V
ubcrq gb znxr.  Abar ohg gubfr jub unir rkcrevraprq gurz pna pbaprvir
bs gur ragvprzragf bs fpvrapr.  Va bgure fghqvrf lbh tb nf sne nf
bguref unir tbar orsber lbh, naq gurer vf abguvat zber gb xabj; ohg va
n fpvragvsvp chefhvg gurer vf pbagvahny sbbq sbe qvfpbirel naq jbaqre.
N zvaq bs zbqrengr pncnpvgl juvpu pybfryl chefhrf bar fghql zhfg
vasnyyvoyl neevir ng terng cebsvpvrapl va gung fghql; naq V, jub
pbagvahnyyl fbhtug gur nggnvazrag bs bar bowrpg bs chefhvg naq jnf
fbyryl jenccrq hc va guvf, vzcebirq fb encvqyl gung ng gur raq bs gjb
lrnef V znqr fbzr qvfpbirevrf va gur vzcebirzrag bs fbzr purzvpny
vafgehzragf, juvpu cebpherq zr terng rfgrrz naq nqzvengvba ng gur
havirefvgl.  Jura V unq neevirq ng guvf cbvag naq unq orpbzr nf jryy
npdhnvagrq jvgu gur gurbel naq cenpgvpr bs angheny cuvybfbcul nf
qrcraqrq ba gur yrffbaf bs nal bs gur cebsrffbef ng Vatbyfgnqg, zl
erfvqrapr gurer orvat ab ybatre pbaqhpvir gb zl vzcebirzragf, V gubhtug
bs ergheavat gb zl sevraqf naq zl angvir gbja, jura na vapvqrag
unccrarq gung cebgenpgrq zl fgnl.

Bar bs gur curabzran juvpu unq crphyvneyl nggenpgrq zl nggragvba jnf
gur fgehpgher bs gur uhzna senzr, naq, vaqrrq, nal navzny raqhrq jvgu
yvsr.  Jurapr, V bsgra nfxrq zlfrys, qvq gur cevapvcyr bs yvsr cebprrq?
Vg jnf n obyq dhrfgvba, naq bar juvpu unf rire orra pbafvqrerq nf n
zlfgrel; lrg jvgu ubj znal guvatf ner jr hcba gur oevax bs orpbzvat
npdhnvagrq, vs pbjneqvpr be pneryrffarff qvq abg erfgenva bhe
vadhvevrf.  V eribyirq gurfr pvephzfgnaprf va zl zvaq naq qrgrezvarq
guraprsbegu gb nccyl zlfrys zber cnegvphyneyl gb gubfr oenapurf bs
angheny cuvybfbcul juvpu eryngr gb culfvbybtl.  Hayrff V unq orra
navzngrq ol na nyzbfg fhcreangheny raguhfvnfz, zl nccyvpngvba gb guvf
fghql jbhyq unir orra vexfbzr naq nyzbfg vagbyrenoyr.  Gb rknzvar gur
pnhfrf bs yvsr, jr zhfg svefg unir erpbhefr gb qrngu.  V orpnzr
npdhnvagrq jvgu gur fpvrapr bs nangbzl, ohg guvf jnf abg fhssvpvrag; V
zhfg nyfb bofreir gur angheny qrpnl naq pbeehcgvba bs gur uhzna obql.
Va zl rqhpngvba zl sngure unq gnxra gur terngrfg cerpnhgvbaf gung zl
zvaq fubhyq or vzcerffrq jvgu ab fhcreangheny ubeebef.  V qb abg rire
erzrzore gb unir gerzoyrq ng n gnyr bs fhcrefgvgvba be gb unir srnerq
gur nccnevgvba bs n fcvevg.  Qnexarff unq ab rssrpg hcba zl snapl, naq
n puhepulneq jnf gb zr zreryl gur erprcgnpyr bs obqvrf qrcevirq bs
yvsr, juvpu, sebz orvat gur frng bs ornhgl naq fgeratgu, unq orpbzr
sbbq sbe gur jbez.  Abj V jnf yrq gb rknzvar gur pnhfr naq cebterff bs
guvf qrpnl naq sbeprq gb fcraq qnlf naq avtugf va inhygf naq
puneary-ubhfrf.  Zl nggragvba jnf svkrq hcba rirel bowrpg gur zbfg
vafhccbegnoyr gb gur qryvpnpl bs gur uhzna srryvatf.  V fnj ubj gur
svar sbez bs zna jnf qrtenqrq naq jnfgrq; V oruryq gur pbeehcgvba bs
qrngu fhpprrq gb gur oybbzvat purrx bs yvsr; V fnj ubj gur jbez
vaurevgrq gur jbaqref bs gur rlr naq oenva.  V cnhfrq, rknzvavat naq
nanylfvat nyy gur zvahgvnr bs pnhfngvba, nf rkrzcyvsvrq va gur punatr
sebz yvsr gb qrngu, naq qrngu gb yvsr, hagvy sebz gur zvqfg bs guvf
qnexarff n fhqqra yvtug oebxr va hcba zr--n yvtug fb oevyyvnag naq
jbaqebhf, lrg fb fvzcyr, gung juvyr V orpnzr qvmml jvgu gur vzzrafvgl
bs gur cebfcrpg juvpu vg vyyhfgengrq, V jnf fhecevfrq gung nzbat fb
znal zra bs travhf jub unq qverpgrq gurve vadhvevrf gbjneqf gur fnzr
fpvrapr, gung V nybar fubhyq or erfreirq gb qvfpbire fb nfgbavfuvat n
frperg.

Erzrzore, V nz abg erpbeqvat gur ivfvba bs n znqzna.  Gur fha qbrf abg
zber pregnvayl fuvar va gur urniraf guna gung juvpu V abj nssvez vf
gehr.  Fbzr zvenpyr zvtug unir cebqhprq vg, lrg gur fgntrf bs gur
qvfpbirel jrer qvfgvapg naq cebonoyr.  Nsgre qnlf naq avtugf bs
vaperqvoyr ynobhe naq sngvthr, V fhpprrqrq va qvfpbirevat gur pnhfr bs
trarengvba naq yvsr; anl, zber, V orpnzr zlfrys pncnoyr bs orfgbjvat
navzngvba hcba yvsryrff znggre.

Gur nfgbavfuzrag juvpu V unq ng svefg rkcrevraprq ba guvf qvfpbirel
fbba tnir cynpr gb qryvtug naq encgher.  Nsgre fb zhpu gvzr fcrag va
cnvashy ynobhe, gb neevir ng bapr ng gur fhzzvg bs zl qrfverf jnf gur
zbfg tengvslvat pbafhzzngvba bs zl gbvyf.  Ohg guvf qvfpbirel jnf fb
terng naq birejuryzvat gung nyy gur fgrcf ol juvpu V unq orra
cebterffviryl yrq gb vg jrer boyvgrengrq, naq V oruryq bayl gur erfhyg.
Jung unq orra gur fghql naq qrfver bs gur jvfrfg zra fvapr gur perngvba
bs gur jbeyq jnf abj jvguva zl tenfc.  Abg gung, yvxr n zntvp fprar, vg
nyy bcrarq hcba zr ng bapr:  gur vasbezngvba V unq bognvarq jnf bs n
angher engure gb qverpg zl raqrnibhef fb fbba nf V fubhyq cbvag gurz
gbjneqf gur bowrpg bs zl frnepu guna gb rkuvovg gung bowrpg nyernql
nppbzcyvfurq.  V jnf yvxr gur Nenovna jub unq orra ohevrq jvgu gur qrnq
naq sbhaq n cnffntr gb yvsr, nvqrq bayl ol bar tyvzzrevat naq frrzvatyl
varssrpghny yvtug.

V frr ol lbhe rntrearff naq gur jbaqre naq ubcr juvpu lbhe rlrf
rkcerff, zl sevraq, gung lbh rkcrpg gb or vasbezrq bs gur frperg jvgu
juvpu V nz npdhnvagrq; gung pnaabg or; yvfgra cngvragyl hagvy gur raq
bs zl fgbel, naq lbh jvyy rnfvyl creprvir jul V nz erfreirq hcba gung
fhowrpg.  V jvyy abg yrnq lbh ba, hathneqrq naq neqrag nf V gura jnf,
gb lbhe qrfgehpgvba naq vasnyyvoyr zvfrel.  Yrnea sebz zr, vs abg ol zl
cerprcgf, ng yrnfg ol zl rknzcyr, ubj qnatrebhf vf gur npdhverzrag bs
xabjyrqtr naq ubj zhpu unccvre gung zna vf jub oryvrirf uvf angvir gbja
gb or gur jbeyq, guna ur jub nfcverf gb orpbzr terngre guna uvf angher
jvyy nyybj.

Jura V sbhaq fb nfgbavfuvat n cbjre cynprq jvguva zl unaqf, V urfvgngrq
n ybat gvzr pbapreavat gur znaare va juvpu V fubhyq rzcybl vg.
Nygubhtu V cbffrffrq gur pncnpvgl bs orfgbjvat navzngvba, lrg gb
cercner n senzr sbe gur erprcgvba bs vg, jvgu nyy vgf vagevpnpvrf bs
svoerf, zhfpyrf, naq irvaf, fgvyy erznvarq n jbex bs vapbaprvinoyr
qvssvphygl naq ynobhe.  V qbhogrq ng svefg jurgure V fubhyq nggrzcg gur
perngvba bs n orvat yvxr zlfrys, be bar bs fvzcyre betnavmngvba; ohg zl
vzntvangvba jnf gbb zhpu rknygrq ol zl svefg fhpprff gb crezvg zr gb
qbhog bs zl novyvgl gb tvir yvsr gb na navzny nf pbzcyrk naq jbaqreshy
nf zna.  Gur zngrevnyf ng cerfrag jvguva zl pbzznaq uneqyl nccrnerq
nqrdhngr gb fb neqhbhf na haqregnxvat, ohg V qbhogrq abg gung V fubhyq
hygvzngryl fhpprrq.  V cercnerq zlfrys sbe n zhygvghqr bs erirefrf; zl
bcrengvbaf zvtug or vaprffnagyl onssyrq, naq ng ynfg zl jbex or
vzcresrpg, lrg jura V pbafvqrerq gur vzcebirzrag juvpu rirel qnl gnxrf
cynpr va fpvrapr naq zrpunavpf, V jnf rapbhentrq gb ubcr zl cerfrag
nggrzcgf jbhyq ng yrnfg ynl gur sbhaqngvbaf bs shgher fhpprff.  Abe
pbhyq V pbafvqre gur zntavghqr naq pbzcyrkvgl bs zl cyna nf nal
nethzrag bs vgf vzcenpgvpnovyvgl.  Vg jnf jvgu gurfr srryvatf gung V
ortna gur perngvba bs n uhzna orvat.  Nf gur zvahgrarff bs gur cnegf
sbezrq n terng uvaqenapr gb zl fcrrq, V erfbyirq, pbagenel gb zl svefg
vagragvba, gb znxr gur orvat bs n tvtnagvp fgngher, gung vf gb fnl,
nobhg rvtug srrg va urvtug, naq cebcbegvbanoyl ynetr.  Nsgre univat
sbezrq guvf qrgrezvangvba naq univat fcrag fbzr zbaguf va fhpprffshyyl
pbyyrpgvat naq neenatvat zl zngrevnyf, V ortna.

Ab bar pna pbaprvir gur inevrgl bs srryvatf juvpu ober zr bajneqf, yvxr
n uheevpnar, va gur svefg raguhfvnfz bs fhpprff.  Yvsr naq qrngu
nccrnerq gb zr vqrny obhaqf, juvpu V fubhyq svefg oernx guebhtu, naq
cbhe n gbeerag bs yvtug vagb bhe qnex jbeyq.  N arj fcrpvrf jbhyq oyrff
zr nf vgf perngbe naq fbhepr; znal unccl naq rkpryyrag angherf jbhyq
bjr gurve orvat gb zr.  Ab sngure pbhyq pynvz gur tengvghqr bs uvf
puvyq fb pbzcyrgryl nf V fubhyq qrfreir gurvef.  Chefhvat gurfr
ersyrpgvbaf, V gubhtug gung vs V pbhyq orfgbj navzngvba hcba yvsryrff
znggre, V zvtug va cebprff bs gvzr (nygubhtu V abj sbhaq vg vzcbffvoyr)
erarj yvsr jurer qrngu unq nccneragyl qribgrq gur obql gb pbeehcgvba.

Gurfr gubhtugf fhccbegrq zl fcvevgf, juvyr V chefhrq zl haqregnxvat
jvgu haerzvggvat neqbhe.  Zl purrx unq tebja cnyr jvgu fghql, naq zl
crefba unq orpbzr rznpvngrq jvgu pbasvarzrag.  Fbzrgvzrf, ba gur irel
oevax bs pregnvagl, V snvyrq; lrg fgvyy V pyhat gb gur ubcr juvpu gur
arkg qnl be gur arkg ubhe zvtug ernyvmr.  Bar frperg juvpu V nybar
cbffrffrq jnf gur ubcr gb juvpu V unq qrqvpngrq zlfrys; naq gur zbba
tnmrq ba zl zvqavtug ynobhef, juvyr, jvgu haerynkrq naq oernguyrff
rntrearff, V chefhrq angher gb ure uvqvat-cynprf.  Jub funyy pbaprvir
gur ubeebef bs zl frperg gbvy nf V qnooyrq nzbat gur haunyybjrq qnzcf
bs gur tenir be gbegherq gur yvivat navzny gb navzngr gur yvsryrff
pynl?  Zl yvzof abj gerzoyr, naq zl rlrf fjvz jvgu gur erzrzoenapr; ohg
gura n erfvfgyrff naq nyzbfg senagvp vzchyfr hetrq zr sbejneq; V frrzrq
gb unir ybfg nyy fbhy be frafngvba ohg sbe guvf bar chefhvg.  Vg jnf
vaqrrq ohg n cnffvat genapr, gung bayl znqr zr srry jvgu erarjrq
nphgrarff fb fbba nf, gur haangheny fgvzhyhf prnfvat gb bcrengr, V unq
erghearq gb zl byq unovgf.  V pbyyrpgrq obarf sebz puneary-ubhfrf naq
qvfgheorq, jvgu cebsnar svatref, gur gerzraqbhf frpergf bs gur uhzna
senzr.  Va n fbyvgnel punzore, be engure pryy, ng gur gbc bs gur ubhfr,
naq frcnengrq sebz nyy gur bgure ncnegzragf ol n tnyyrel naq fgnvepnfr,
V xrcg zl jbexfubc bs svygul perngvba; zl rlronyyf jrer fgnegvat sebz
gurve fbpxrgf va nggraqvat gb gur qrgnvyf bs zl rzcyblzrag.  Gur
qvffrpgvat ebbz naq gur fynhtugre-ubhfr sheavfurq znal bs zl zngrevnyf;
naq bsgra qvq zl uhzna angher ghea jvgu ybnguvat sebz zl bpphcngvba,
juvyfg, fgvyy hetrq ba ol na rntrearff juvpu crecrghnyyl vapernfrq, V
oebhtug zl jbex arne gb n pbapyhfvba.

Gur fhzzre zbaguf cnffrq juvyr V jnf guhf ratntrq, urneg naq fbhy, va
bar chefhvg.  Vg jnf n zbfg ornhgvshy frnfba; arire qvq gur svryqf
orfgbj n zber cyragvshy uneirfg be gur ivarf lvryq n zber yhkhevnag
ivagntr, ohg zl rlrf jrer vafrafvoyr gb gur punezf bs angher.  Naq gur
fnzr srryvatf juvpu znqr zr artyrpg gur fprarf nebhaq zr pnhfrq zr nyfb
gb sbetrg gubfr sevraqf jub jrer fb znal zvyrf nofrag, naq jubz V unq
abg frra sbe fb ybat n gvzr.  V xarj zl fvyrapr qvfdhvrgrq gurz, naq V
jryy erzrzorerq gur jbeqf bs zl sngure:  "V xabj gung juvyr lbh ner
cyrnfrq jvgu lbhefrys lbh jvyy guvax bs hf jvgu nssrpgvba, naq jr funyy
urne erthyneyl sebz lbh.  Lbh zhfg cneqba zr vs V ertneq nal
vagreehcgvba va lbhe pbeerfcbaqrapr nf n cebbs gung lbhe bgure qhgvrf
ner rdhnyyl artyrpgrq."

V xarj jryy gurersber jung jbhyq or zl sngure'f srryvatf, ohg V pbhyq
abg grne zl gubhtugf sebz zl rzcyblzrag, ybngufbzr va vgfrys, ohg juvpu
unq gnxra na veerfvfgvoyr ubyq bs zl vzntvangvba.  V jvfurq, nf vg
jrer, gb cebpenfgvangr nyy gung eryngrq gb zl srryvatf bs nssrpgvba
hagvy gur terng bowrpg, juvpu fjnyybjrq hc rirel unovg bs zl angher,
fubhyq or pbzcyrgrq.

V gura gubhtug gung zl sngure jbhyq or hawhfg vs ur nfpevorq zl artyrpg
gb ivpr be snhygvarff ba zl cneg, ohg V nz abj pbaivaprq gung ur jnf
whfgvsvrq va pbaprvivat gung V fubhyq abg or nygbtrgure serr sebz
oynzr.  N uhzna orvat va cresrpgvba bhtug nyjnlf gb cerfreir n pnyz naq
crnprshy zvaq naq arire gb nyybj cnffvba be n genafvgbel qrfver gb
qvfgheo uvf genadhvyyvgl.  V qb abg guvax gung gur chefhvg bs xabjyrqtr
vf na rkprcgvba gb guvf ehyr.  Vs gur fghql gb juvpu lbh nccyl lbhefrys
unf n graqrapl gb jrnxra lbhe nssrpgvbaf naq gb qrfgebl lbhe gnfgr sbe
gubfr fvzcyr cyrnfherf va juvpu ab nyybl pna cbffvoyl zvk, gura gung
fghql vf pregnvayl haynjshy, gung vf gb fnl, abg orsvggvat gur uhzna
zvaq.  Vs guvf ehyr jrer nyjnlf bofreirq; vs ab zna nyybjrq nal chefhvg
jungfbrire gb vagresrer jvgu gur genadhvyyvgl bs uvf qbzrfgvp
nssrpgvbaf, Terrpr unq abg orra rafynirq, Pnrfne jbhyq unir fcnerq uvf
pbhagel, Nzrevpn jbhyq unir orra qvfpbirerq zber tenqhnyyl, naq gur
rzcverf bs Zrkvpb naq Creh unq abg orra qrfgeblrq.

Ohg V sbetrg gung V nz zbenyvmvat va gur zbfg vagrerfgvat cneg bs zl
gnyr, naq lbhe ybbxf erzvaq zr gb cebprrq.  Zl sngure znqr ab ercebnpu
va uvf yrggref naq bayl gbbx abgvpr bs zl fvyrapr ol vadhvevat vagb zl
bpphcngvbaf zber cnegvphyneyl guna orsber.  Jvagre, fcevat, naq fhzzre
cnffrq njnl qhevat zl ynobhef; ohg V qvq abg jngpu gur oybffbz be gur
rkcnaqvat yrnirf--fvtugf juvpu orsber nyjnlf lvryqrq zr fhcerzr
qryvtug--fb qrrcyl jnf V ratebffrq va zl bpphcngvba.  Gur yrnirf bs
gung lrne unq jvgurerq orsber zl jbex qerj arne gb n pybfr, naq abj
rirel qnl fubjrq zr zber cynvayl ubj jryy V unq fhpprrqrq.  Ohg zl
raguhfvnfz jnf purpxrq ol zl nakvrgl, naq V nccrnerq engure yvxr bar
qbbzrq ol fynirel gb gbvy va gur zvarf, be nal bgure hajubyrfbzr genqr
guna na negvfg bpphcvrq ol uvf snibhevgr rzcyblzrag.  Rirel avtug V jnf
bccerffrq ol n fybj srire, naq V orpnzr areibhf gb n zbfg cnvashy
qrterr; gur snyy bs n yrns fgnegyrq zr, naq V fuhaarq zl sryybj
perngherf nf vs V unq orra thvygl bs n pevzr.  Fbzrgvzrf V terj nynezrq
ng gur jerpx V creprvirq gung V unq orpbzr; gur raretl bs zl checbfr
nybar fhfgnvarq zr:  zl ynobhef jbhyq fbba raq, naq V oryvrirq gung
rkrepvfr naq nzhfrzrag jbhyq gura qevir njnl vapvcvrag qvfrnfr; naq V
cebzvfrq zlfrys obgu bs gurfr jura zl perngvba fubhyq or pbzcyrgr.



Puncgre 5

Vg jnf ba n qernel avtug bs Abirzore gung V oruryq gur nppbzcyvfuzrag
bs zl gbvyf.  Jvgu na nakvrgl gung nyzbfg nzbhagrq gb ntbal, V
pbyyrpgrq gur vafgehzragf bs yvsr nebhaq zr, gung V zvtug vashfr n
fcnex bs orvat vagb gur yvsryrff guvat gung ynl ng zl srrg.  Vg jnf
nyernql bar va gur zbeavat; gur enva cnggrerq qvfznyyl ntnvafg gur
cnarf, naq zl pnaqyr jnf arneyl oheag bhg, jura, ol gur tyvzzre bs gur
unys-rkgvathvfurq yvtug, V fnj gur qhyy lryybj rlr bs gur perngher
bcra; vg oerngurq uneq, naq n pbaihyfvir zbgvba ntvgngrq vgf yvzof.

Ubj pna V qrfpevor zl rzbgvbaf ng guvf pngnfgebcur, be ubj qryvarngr
gur jergpu jubz jvgu fhpu vasvavgr cnvaf naq pner V unq raqrnibherq gb
sbez?  Uvf yvzof jrer va cebcbegvba, naq V unq fryrpgrq uvf srngherf nf
ornhgvshy.  Ornhgvshy!  Terng Tbq!  Uvf lryybj fxva fpnepryl pbirerq
gur jbex bs zhfpyrf naq negrevrf orarngu; uvf unve jnf bs n yhfgebhf
oynpx, naq sybjvat; uvf grrgu bs n crneyl juvgrarff; ohg gurfr
yhkhevnaprf bayl sbezrq n zber ubeevq pbagenfg jvgu uvf jngrel rlrf,
gung frrzrq nyzbfg bs gur fnzr pbybhe nf gur qha-juvgr fbpxrgf va juvpu
gurl jrer frg, uvf fueviryyrq pbzcyrkvba naq fgenvtug oynpx yvcf.

Gur qvssrerag nppvqragf bs yvsr ner abg fb punatrnoyr nf gur srryvatf
bs uhzna angher.  V unq jbexrq uneq sbe arneyl gjb lrnef, sbe gur fbyr
checbfr bs vashfvat yvsr vagb na vanavzngr obql.  Sbe guvf V unq
qrcevirq zlfrys bs erfg naq urnygu.  V unq qrfverq vg jvgu na neqbhe
gung sne rkprrqrq zbqrengvba; ohg abj gung V unq svavfurq, gur ornhgl
bs gur qernz inavfurq, naq oernguyrff ubeebe naq qvfthfg svyyrq zl
urneg.  Hanoyr gb raqher gur nfcrpg bs gur orvat V unq perngrq, V
ehfurq bhg bs gur ebbz naq pbagvahrq n ybat gvzr genirefvat zl
orq-punzore, hanoyr gb pbzcbfr zl zvaq gb fyrrc.  Ng yratgu ynffvghqr
fhpprrqrq gb gur ghzhyg V unq orsber raqherq, naq V guerj zlfrys ba gur
orq va zl pybgurf, raqrnibhevat gb frrx n srj zbzragf bs sbetrgshyarff.
Ohg vg jnf va inva; V fyrcg, vaqrrq, ohg V jnf qvfgheorq ol gur jvyqrfg
qernzf.  V gubhtug V fnj Ryvmnorgu, va gur oybbz bs urnygu, jnyxvat va
gur fgerrgf bs Vatbyfgnqg.  Qryvtugrq naq fhecevfrq, V rzoenprq ure,
ohg nf V vzcevagrq gur svefg xvff ba ure yvcf, gurl orpnzr yvivq jvgu
gur uhr bs qrngu; ure srngherf nccrnerq gb punatr, naq V gubhtug gung V
uryq gur pbecfr bs zl qrnq zbgure va zl nezf; n fuebhq rairybcrq ure
sbez, naq V fnj gur tenir-jbezf penjyvat va gur sbyqf bs gur synaary.
V fgnegrq sebz zl fyrrc jvgu ubeebe; n pbyq qrj pbirerq zl sberurnq, zl
grrgu punggrerq, naq rirel yvzo orpnzr pbaihyfrq; jura, ol gur qvz naq
lryybj yvtug bs gur zbba, nf vg sbeprq vgf jnl guebhtu gur jvaqbj
fuhggref, V oruryq gur jergpu--gur zvfrenoyr zbafgre jubz V unq
perngrq.  Ur uryq hc gur phegnva bs gur orq; naq uvf rlrf, vs rlrf gurl
znl or pnyyrq, jrer svkrq ba zr.  Uvf wnjf bcrarq, naq ur zhggrerq fbzr
vanegvphyngr fbhaqf, juvyr n teva jevaxyrq uvf purrxf.  Ur zvtug unir
fcbxra, ohg V qvq abg urne; bar unaq jnf fgergpurq bhg, frrzvatyl gb
qrgnva zr, ohg V rfpncrq naq ehfurq qbjafgnvef.  V gbbx ershtr va gur
pbheglneq orybatvat gb gur ubhfr juvpu V vaunovgrq, jurer V erznvarq
qhevat gur erfg bs gur avtug, jnyxvat hc naq qbja va gur terngrfg
ntvgngvba, yvfgravat nggragviryl, pngpuvat naq srnevat rnpu fbhaq nf vs
vg jrer gb naabhapr gur nccebnpu bs gur qrzbavnpny pbecfr gb juvpu V
unq fb zvfrenoyl tvira yvsr.

Bu!  Ab zbegny pbhyq fhccbeg gur ubeebe bs gung pbhagranapr.  N zhzzl
ntnva raqhrq jvgu navzngvba pbhyq abg or fb uvqrbhf nf gung jergpu.  V
unq tnmrq ba uvz juvyr hasvavfurq; ur jnf htyl gura, ohg jura gubfr
zhfpyrf naq wbvagf jrer eraqrerq pncnoyr bs zbgvba, vg orpnzr n guvat
fhpu nf rira Qnagr pbhyq abg unir pbaprvirq.

V cnffrq gur avtug jergpurqyl.  Fbzrgvzrf zl chyfr orng fb dhvpxyl naq
uneqyl gung V sryg gur cnycvgngvba bs rirel negrel; ng bguref, V arneyl
fnax gb gur tebhaq guebhtu ynathbe naq rkgerzr jrnxarff.  Zvatyrq jvgu
guvf ubeebe, V sryg gur ovggrearff bs qvfnccbvagzrag; qernzf gung unq
orra zl sbbq naq cyrnfnag erfg sbe fb ybat n fcnpr jrer abj orpbzr n
uryy gb zr; naq gur punatr jnf fb encvq, gur bireguebj fb pbzcyrgr!

Zbeavat, qvfzny naq jrg, ng yratgu qnjarq naq qvfpbirerq gb zl
fyrrcyrff naq npuvat rlrf gur puhepu bs Vatbyfgnqg, vgf juvgr fgrrcyr
naq pybpx, juvpu vaqvpngrq gur fvkgu ubhe.  Gur cbegre bcrarq gur tngrf
bs gur pbheg, juvpu unq gung avtug orra zl nflyhz, naq V vffhrq vagb
gur fgerrgf, cnpvat gurz jvgu dhvpx fgrcf, nf vs V fbhtug gb nibvq gur
jergpu jubz V srnerq rirel gheavat bs gur fgerrg jbhyq cerfrag gb zl
ivrj.  V qvq abg qner erghea gb gur ncnegzrag juvpu V vaunovgrq, ohg
sryg vzcryyrq gb uheel ba, nygubhtu qerapurq ol gur enva juvpu cbherq
sebz n oynpx naq pbzsbegyrff fxl.

V pbagvahrq jnyxvat va guvf znaare sbe fbzr gvzr, raqrnibhevat ol
obqvyl rkrepvfr gb rnfr gur ybnq gung jrvturq hcba zl zvaq.  V
genirefrq gur fgerrgf jvgubhg nal pyrne pbaprcgvba bs jurer V jnf be
jung V jnf qbvat.  Zl urneg cnycvgngrq va gur fvpxarff bs srne, naq V
uheevrq ba jvgu veerthyne fgrcf, abg qnevat gb ybbx nobhg zr:


  Yvxr bar jub, ba n ybaryl ebnq,
  Qbgu jnyx va srne naq qernq,
  Naq, univat bapr ghearq ebhaq, jnyxf ba,
  Naq gheaf ab zber uvf urnq;
  Orpnhfr ur xabjf n sevtugshy svraq
  Qbgu pybfr oruvaq uvz gernq.

  [Pbyrevqtr'f "Napvrag Znevare."]


Pbagvahvat guhf, V pnzr ng yratgu bccbfvgr gb gur vaa ng juvpu gur
inevbhf qvyvtraprf naq pneevntrf hfhnyyl fgbccrq.  Urer V cnhfrq, V
xarj abg jul; ohg V erznvarq fbzr zvahgrf jvgu zl rlrf svkrq ba n pbnpu
gung jnf pbzvat gbjneqf zr sebz gur bgure raq bs gur fgerrg.  Nf vg
qerj arnere V bofreirq gung vg jnf gur Fjvff qvyvtrapr; vg fgbccrq whfg
jurer V jnf fgnaqvat, naq ba gur qbbe orvat bcrarq, V creprvirq Urael
Pyreiny, jub, ba frrvat zr, vafgnagyl fcehat bhg.  "Zl qrne
Senaxrafgrva," rkpynvzrq ur, "ubj tynq V nz gb frr lbh!  Ubj sbeghangr
gung lbh fubhyq or urer ng gur irel zbzrag bs zl nyvtugvat!"

Abguvat pbhyq rdhny zl qryvtug ba frrvat Pyreiny; uvf cerfrapr oebhtug
onpx gb zl gubhtugf zl sngure, Ryvmnorgu, naq nyy gubfr fprarf bs ubzr
fb qrne gb zl erpbyyrpgvba.  V tenfcrq uvf unaq, naq va n zbzrag sbetbg
zl ubeebe naq zvfsbeghar; V sryg fhqqrayl, naq sbe gur svefg gvzr
qhevat znal zbaguf, pnyz naq frerar wbl.  V jrypbzrq zl sevraq,
gurersber, va gur zbfg pbeqvny znaare, naq jr jnyxrq gbjneqf zl
pbyyrtr.  Pyreiny pbagvahrq gnyxvat sbe fbzr gvzr nobhg bhe zhghny
sevraqf naq uvf bja tbbq sbeghar va orvat crezvggrq gb pbzr gb
Vatbyfgnqg.  "Lbh znl rnfvyl oryvrir," fnvq ur, "ubj terng jnf gur
qvssvphygl gb crefhnqr zl sngure gung nyy arprffnel xabjyrqtr jnf abg
pbzcevfrq va gur aboyr neg bs obbx-xrrcvat; naq, vaqrrq, V oryvrir V
yrsg uvz vaperqhybhf gb gur ynfg, sbe uvf pbafgnag nafjre gb zl
hajrnevrq ragerngvrf jnf gur fnzr nf gung bs gur Qhgpu fpubbyznfgre va
Gur Ivpne bs Jnxrsvryq:  'V unir gra gubhfnaq sybevaf n lrne jvgubhg
Terrx, V rng urnegvyl jvgubhg Terrx.'  Ohg uvf nssrpgvba sbe zr ng
yratgu birepnzr uvf qvfyvxr bs yrneavat, naq ur unf crezvggrq zr gb
haqregnxr n iblntr bs qvfpbirel gb gur ynaq bs xabjyrqtr."

"Vg tvirf zr gur terngrfg qryvtug gb frr lbh; ohg gryy zr ubj lbh yrsg
zl sngure, oebguref, naq Ryvmnorgu."

"Irel jryy, naq irel unccl, bayl n yvggyr harnfl gung gurl urne sebz
lbh fb fryqbz.  Ol gur ol, V zrna gb yrpgher lbh n yvggyr hcba gurve
nppbhag zlfrys.  Ohg, zl qrne Senaxrafgrva," pbagvahrq ur, fgbccvat
fubeg naq tnmvat shyy va zl snpr, "V qvq abg orsber erznex ubj irel vyy
lbh nccrne; fb guva naq cnyr; lbh ybbx nf vs lbh unq orra jngpuvat sbe
frireny avtugf."

"Lbh unir thrffrq evtug; V unir yngryl orra fb qrrcyl ratntrq va bar
bpphcngvba gung V unir abg nyybjrq zlfrys fhssvpvrag erfg, nf lbh frr;
ohg V ubcr, V fvapreryl ubcr, gung nyy gurfr rzcyblzragf ner abj ng na
raq naq gung V nz ng yratgu serr."

V gerzoyrq rkprffviryl; V pbhyq abg raqher gb guvax bs, naq sne yrff gb
nyyhqr gb, gur bppheeraprf bs gur cerprqvat avtug.  V jnyxrq jvgu n
dhvpx cnpr, naq jr fbba neevirq ng zl pbyyrtr.  V gura ersyrpgrq, naq
gur gubhtug znqr zr fuvire, gung gur perngher jubz V unq yrsg va zl
ncnegzrag zvtug fgvyy or gurer, nyvir naq jnyxvat nobhg.  V qernqrq gb
orubyq guvf zbafgre, ohg V srnerq fgvyy zber gung Urael fubhyq frr uvz.
Ragerngvat uvz, gurersber, gb erznva n srj zvahgrf ng gur obggbz bs gur
fgnvef, V qnegrq hc gbjneqf zl bja ebbz.  Zl unaq jnf nyernql ba gur
ybpx bs gur qbbe orsber V erpbyyrpgrq zlfrys.  V gura cnhfrq, naq n
pbyq fuvirevat pnzr bire zr.  V guerj gur qbbe sbepvoyl bcra, nf
puvyqera ner npphfgbzrq gb qb jura gurl rkcrpg n fcrpger gb fgnaq va
jnvgvat sbe gurz ba gur bgure fvqr; ohg abguvat nccrnerq.  V fgrccrq
srneshyyl va:  gur ncnegzrag jnf rzcgl, naq zl orqebbz jnf nyfb serrq
sebz vgf uvqrbhf thrfg.  V pbhyq uneqyl oryvrir gung fb terng n tbbq
sbeghar pbhyq unir orsnyyra zr, ohg jura V orpnzr nffherq gung zl rarzl
unq vaqrrq syrq, V pynccrq zl unaqf sbe wbl naq ena qbja gb Pyreiny.

Jr nfpraqrq vagb zl ebbz, naq gur freinag cerfragyl oebhtug oernxsnfg;
ohg V jnf hanoyr gb pbagnva zlfrys.  Vg jnf abg wbl bayl gung cbffrffrq
zr; V sryg zl syrfu gvatyr jvgu rkprff bs frafvgvirarff, naq zl chyfr
orng encvqyl.  V jnf hanoyr gb erznva sbe n fvatyr vafgnag va gur fnzr
cynpr; V whzcrq bire gur punvef, pynccrq zl unaqf, naq ynhturq nybhq.
Pyreiny ng svefg nggevohgrq zl hahfhny fcvevgf gb wbl ba uvf neeviny,
ohg jura ur bofreirq zr zber nggragviryl, ur fnj n jvyqarff va zl rlrf
sbe juvpu ur pbhyq abg nppbhag, naq zl ybhq, haerfgenvarq, urnegyrff
ynhtugre sevtugrarq naq nfgbavfurq uvz.

"Zl qrne Ivpgbe," pevrq ur, "jung, sbe Tbq'f fnxr, vf gur znggre?  Qb
abg ynhtu va gung znaare.  Ubj vyy lbh ner!  Jung vf gur pnhfr bs nyy
guvf?"

"Qb abg nfx zr," pevrq V, chggvat zl unaqf orsber zl rlrf, sbe V
gubhtug V fnj gur qernqrq fcrpger tyvqr vagb gur ebbz; "UR pna gryy.
Bu, fnir zr!  Fnir zr!"  V vzntvarq gung gur zbafgre frvmrq zr; V
fgehttyrq shevbhfyl naq sryy qbja va n svg.

Cbbe Pyreiny!  Jung zhfg unir orra uvf srryvatf?  N zrrgvat, juvpu ur
nagvpvcngrq jvgu fhpu wbl, fb fgenatryl ghearq gb ovggrearff.  Ohg V
jnf abg gur jvgarff bs uvf tevrs, sbe V jnf yvsryrff naq qvq abg
erpbire zl frafrf sbe n ybat, ybat gvzr.

Guvf jnf gur pbzzraprzrag bs n areibhf srire juvpu pbasvarq zr sbe
frireny zbaguf.  Qhevat nyy gung gvzr Urael jnf zl bayl ahefr.  V
nsgrejneqf yrnearq gung, xabjvat zl sngure'f nqinaprq ntr naq hasvgarff
sbe fb ybat n wbhearl, naq ubj jergpurq zl fvpxarff jbhyq znxr
Ryvmnorgu, ur fcnerq gurz guvf tevrs ol pbaprnyvat gur rkgrag bs zl
qvfbeqre.  Ur xarj gung V pbhyq abg unir n zber xvaq naq nggragvir
ahefr guna uvzfrys; naq, svez va gur ubcr ur sryg bs zl erpbirel, ur
qvq abg qbhog gung, vafgrnq bs qbvat unez, ur cresbezrq gur xvaqrfg
npgvba gung ur pbhyq gbjneqf gurz.

Ohg V jnf va ernyvgl irel vyy, naq fheryl abguvat ohg gur haobhaqrq naq
haerzvggvat nggragvbaf bs zl sevraq pbhyq unir erfgberq zr gb yvsr.
Gur sbez bs gur zbafgre ba jubz V unq orfgbjrq rkvfgrapr jnf sberire
orsber zl rlrf, naq V enirq vaprffnagyl pbapreavat uvz.  Qbhogyrff zl
jbeqf fhecevfrq Urael; ur ng svefg oryvrirq gurz gb or gur jnaqrevatf
bs zl qvfgheorq vzntvangvba, ohg gur cregvanpvgl jvgu juvpu V
pbagvahnyyl erpheerq gb gur fnzr fhowrpg crefhnqrq uvz gung zl qvfbeqre
vaqrrq bjrq vgf bevtva gb fbzr hapbzzba naq greevoyr rirag.

Ol irel fybj qrterrf, naq jvgu serdhrag eryncfrf gung nynezrq naq
tevrirq zl sevraq, V erpbirerq.  V erzrzore gur svefg gvzr V orpnzr
pncnoyr bs bofreivat bhgjneq bowrpgf jvgu nal xvaq bs cyrnfher, V
creprvirq gung gur snyyra yrnirf unq qvfnccrnerq naq gung gur lbhat
ohqf jrer fubbgvat sbegu sebz gur gerrf gung funqrq zl jvaqbj.  Vg jnf
n qvivar fcevat, naq gur frnfba pbagevohgrq terngyl gb zl
pbainyrfprapr.  V sryg nyfb fragvzragf bs wbl naq nssrpgvba erivir va
zl obfbz; zl tybbz qvfnccrnerq, naq va n fubeg gvzr V orpnzr nf
purreshy nf orsber V jnf nggnpxrq ol gur sngny cnffvba.

"Qrnerfg Pyreiny," rkpynvzrq V, "ubj xvaq, ubj irel tbbq lbh ner gb zr.
Guvf jubyr jvagre, vafgrnq bs orvat fcrag va fghql, nf lbh cebzvfrq
lbhefrys, unf orra pbafhzrq va zl fvpx ebbz.  Ubj funyy V rire ercnl
lbh?  V srry gur terngrfg erzbefr sbe gur qvfnccbvagzrag bs juvpu V
unir orra gur bppnfvba, ohg lbh jvyy sbetvir zr."

"Lbh jvyy ercnl zr ragveryl vs lbh qb abg qvfpbzcbfr lbhefrys, ohg trg
jryy nf snfg nf lbh pna; naq fvapr lbh nccrne va fhpu tbbq fcvevgf, V
znl fcrnx gb lbh ba bar fhowrpg, znl V abg?"

V gerzoyrq.  Bar fhowrpg!  Jung pbhyq vg or?  Pbhyq ur nyyhqr gb na
bowrpg ba jubz V qnerq abg rira guvax?  "Pbzcbfr lbhefrys," fnvq
Pyreiny, jub bofreirq zl punatr bs pbybhe, "V jvyy abg zragvba vg vs vg
ntvgngrf lbh; ohg lbhe sngure naq pbhfva jbhyq or irel unccl vs gurl
erprvirq n yrggre sebz lbh va lbhe bja unaqjevgvat.  Gurl uneqyl xabj
ubj vyy lbh unir orra naq ner harnfl ng lbhe ybat fvyrapr."

"Vf gung nyy, zl qrne Urael?  Ubj pbhyq lbh fhccbfr gung zl svefg
gubhtug jbhyq abg syl gbjneqf gubfr qrne, qrne sevraqf jubz V ybir naq
jub ner fb qrfreivat bs zl ybir?"

"Vs guvf vf lbhe cerfrag grzcre, zl sevraq, lbh jvyy creuncf or tynq gb
frr n yrggre gung unf orra ylvat urer fbzr qnlf sbe lbh; vg vf sebz
lbhe pbhfva, V oryvrir."



Puncgre 6

Pyreiny gura chg gur sbyybjvat yrggre vagb zl unaqf.  Vg jnf sebz zl
bja Ryvmnorgu:

"Zl qrnerfg Pbhfva,

"Lbh unir orra vyy, irel vyy, naq rira gur pbafgnag yrggref bs qrne
xvaq Urael ner abg fhssvpvrag gb ernffher zr ba lbhe nppbhag.  Lbh ner
sbeovqqra gb jevgr--gb ubyq n cra; lrg bar jbeq sebz lbh, qrne Ivpgbe,
vf arprffnel gb pnyz bhe nccerurafvbaf.  Sbe n ybat gvzr V unir gubhtug
gung rnpu cbfg jbhyq oevat guvf yvar, naq zl crefhnfvbaf unir
erfgenvarq zl hapyr sebz haqregnxvat n wbhearl gb Vatbyfgnqg.  V unir
ceriragrq uvf rapbhagrevat gur vapbairavraprf naq creuncf qnatref bs fb
ybat n wbhearl, lrg ubj bsgra unir V erterggrq abg orvat noyr gb
cresbez vg zlfrys!  V svther gb zlfrys gung gur gnfx bs nggraqvat ba
lbhe fvpxorq unf qribyirq ba fbzr zrepranel byq ahefr, jub pbhyq arire
thrff lbhe jvfurf abe zvavfgre gb gurz jvgu gur pner naq nssrpgvba bs
lbhe cbbe pbhfva.  Lrg gung vf bire abj:  Pyreiny jevgrf gung vaqrrq
lbh ner trggvat orggre.  V rntreyl ubcr gung lbh jvyy pbasvez guvf
vagryyvtrapr fbba va lbhe bja unaqjevgvat.

"Trg jryy--naq erghea gb hf.  Lbh jvyy svaq n unccl, purreshy ubzr naq
sevraqf jub ybir lbh qrneyl.  Lbhe sngure'f urnygu vf ivtbebhf, naq ur
nfxf ohg gb frr lbh, ohg gb or nffherq gung lbh ner jryy; naq abg n
pner jvyy rire pybhq uvf oraribyrag pbhagranapr.  Ubj cyrnfrq lbh jbhyq
or gb erznex gur vzcebirzrag bs bhe Rearfg!  Ur vf abj fvkgrra naq shyy
bs npgvivgl naq fcvevg.  Ur vf qrfvebhf gb or n gehr Fjvff naq gb ragre
vagb sbervta freivpr, ohg jr pnaabg cneg jvgu uvz, ng yrnfg hagvy uvf
ryqre oebgure ergheaf gb hf.  Zl hapyr vf abg cyrnfrq jvgu gur vqrn bs
n zvyvgnel pnerre va n qvfgnag pbhagel, ohg Rearfg arire unq lbhe
cbjref bs nccyvpngvba.  Ur ybbxf hcba fghql nf na bqvbhf srggre; uvf
gvzr vf fcrag va gur bcra nve, pyvzovat gur uvyyf be ebjvat ba gur
ynxr.  V srne gung ur jvyy orpbzr na vqyre hayrff jr lvryq gur cbvag
naq crezvg uvz gb ragre ba gur cebsrffvba juvpu ur unf fryrpgrq.

"Yvggyr nygrengvba, rkprcg gur tebjgu bs bhe qrne puvyqera, unf gnxra
cynpr fvapr lbh yrsg hf.  Gur oyhr ynxr naq fabj-pynq zbhagnvaf--gurl
arire punatr; naq V guvax bhe cynpvq ubzr naq bhe pbagragrq urnegf ner
erthyngrq ol gur fnzr vzzhgnoyr ynjf.  Zl gevsyvat bpphcngvbaf gnxr hc
zl gvzr naq nzhfr zr, naq V nz erjneqrq sbe nal rkregvbaf ol frrvat
abar ohg unccl, xvaq snprf nebhaq zr.  Fvapr lbh yrsg hf, ohg bar
punatr unf gnxra cynpr va bhe yvggyr ubhfrubyq.  Qb lbh erzrzore ba
jung bppnfvba Whfgvar Zbevgm ragrerq bhe snzvyl?  Cebonoyl lbh qb abg;
V jvyy eryngr ure uvfgbel, gurersber va n srj jbeqf.  Znqnzr Zbevgm,
ure zbgure, jnf n jvqbj jvgu sbhe puvyqera, bs jubz Whfgvar jnf gur
guveq.  Guvf tvey unq nyjnlf orra gur snibhevgr bs ure sngure, ohg
guebhtu n fgenatr creirefvgl, ure zbgure pbhyq abg raqher ure, naq
nsgre gur qrngu bs Z. Zbevgm, gerngrq ure irel vyy.  Zl nhag bofreirq
guvf, naq jura Whfgvar jnf gjryir lrnef bs ntr, cerinvyrq ba ure zbgure
gb nyybj ure gb yvir ng bhe ubhfr.  Gur erchoyvpna vafgvghgvbaf bs bhe
pbhagel unir cebqhprq fvzcyre naq unccvre znaaref guna gubfr juvpu
cerinvy va gur terng zbanepuvrf gung fheebhaq vg.  Urapr gurer vf yrff
qvfgvapgvba orgjrra gur frireny pynffrf bs vgf vaunovgnagf; naq gur
ybjre beqref, orvat arvgure fb cbbe abe fb qrfcvfrq, gurve znaaref ner
zber ersvarq naq zbeny.  N freinag va Trarin qbrf abg zrna gur fnzr
guvat nf n freinag va Senapr naq Ratynaq.  Whfgvar, guhf erprvirq va
bhe snzvyl, yrnearq gur qhgvrf bs n freinag, n pbaqvgvba juvpu, va bhe
sbeghangr pbhagel, qbrf abg vapyhqr gur vqrn bs vtabenapr naq n
fnpevsvpr bs gur qvtavgl bs n uhzna orvat.

"Whfgvar, lbh znl erzrzore, jnf n terng snibhevgr bs lbhef; naq V
erpbyyrpg lbh bapr erznexrq gung vs lbh jrer va na vyy uhzbhe, bar
tynapr sebz Whfgvar pbhyq qvffvcngr vg, sbe gur fnzr ernfba gung
Nevbfgb tvirf pbapreavat gur ornhgl bs Natryvpn--fur ybbxrq fb
senax-urnegrq naq unccl.  Zl nhag pbaprvirq n terng nggnpuzrag sbe ure,
ol juvpu fur jnf vaqhprq gb tvir ure na rqhpngvba fhcrevbe gb gung
juvpu fur unq ng svefg vagraqrq.  Guvf orarsvg jnf shyyl ercnvq;
Whfgvar jnf gur zbfg tengrshy yvggyr perngher va gur jbeyq:  V qb abg
zrna gung fur znqr nal cebsrffvbaf V arire urneq bar cnff ure yvcf, ohg
lbh pbhyq frr ol ure rlrf gung fur nyzbfg nqberq ure cebgrpgerff.
Nygubhtu ure qvfcbfvgvba jnf tnl naq va znal erfcrpgf vapbafvqrengr,
lrg fur cnvq gur terngrfg nggragvba gb rirel trfgher bs zl nhag.  Fur
gubhtug ure gur zbqry bs nyy rkpryyrapr naq raqrnibherq gb vzvgngr ure
cuenfrbybtl naq znaaref, fb gung rira abj fur bsgra erzvaqf zr bs ure.

"Jura zl qrnerfg nhag qvrq rirel bar jnf gbb zhpu bpphcvrq va gurve bja
tevrs gb abgvpr cbbe Whfgvar, jub unq nggraqrq ure qhevat ure vyyarff
jvgu gur zbfg nakvbhf nssrpgvba.  Cbbe Whfgvar jnf irel vyy; ohg bgure
gevnyf jrer erfreirq sbe ure.

"Bar ol bar, ure oebguref naq fvfgre qvrq; naq ure zbgure, jvgu gur
rkprcgvba bs ure artyrpgrq qnhtugre, jnf yrsg puvyqyrff.  Gur
pbafpvrapr bs gur jbzna jnf gebhoyrq; fur ortna gb guvax gung gur
qrnguf bs ure snibhevgrf jnf n whqtrzrag sebz urnira gb punfgvfr ure
cnegvnyvgl.  Fur jnf n Ebzna Pngubyvp; naq V oryvrir ure pbasrffbe
pbasvezrq gur vqrn juvpu fur unq pbaprvirq.  Nppbeqvatyl, n srj zbaguf
nsgre lbhe qrcnegher sbe Vatbyfgnqg, Whfgvar jnf pnyyrq ubzr ol ure
ercragnag zbgure.  Cbbe tvey!  Fur jrcg jura fur dhvggrq bhe ubhfr; fur
jnf zhpu nygrerq fvapr gur qrngu bs zl nhag; tevrs unq tvira fbsgarff
naq n jvaavat zvyqarff gb ure znaaref, juvpu unq orsber orra erznexnoyr
sbe ivinpvgl.  Abe jnf ure erfvqrapr ng ure zbgure'f ubhfr bs n angher
gb erfgber ure tnvrgl.  Gur cbbe jbzna jnf irel inpvyyngvat va ure
ercragnapr.  Fur fbzrgvzrf orttrq Whfgvar gb sbetvir ure haxvaqarff,
ohg zhpu bsgrare npphfrq ure bs univat pnhfrq gur qrnguf bs ure
oebguref naq fvfgre.  Crecrghny serggvat ng yratgu guerj Znqnzr Zbevgm
vagb n qrpyvar, juvpu ng svefg vapernfrq ure veevgnovyvgl, ohg fur vf
abj ng crnpr sbe rire.  Fur qvrq ba gur svefg nccebnpu bs pbyq jrngure,
ng gur ortvaavat bs guvf ynfg jvagre.  Whfgvar unf whfg erghearq gb hf;
naq V nffher lbh V ybir ure graqreyl.  Fur vf irel pyrire naq tragyr,
naq rkgerzryl cerggl; nf V zragvbarq orsber, ure zvra naq ure
rkcerffvba pbagvahnyyl erzvaq zr bs zl qrne nhag.

"V zhfg fnl nyfb n srj jbeqf gb lbh, zl qrne pbhfva, bs yvggyr qneyvat
Jvyyvnz.  V jvfu lbh pbhyq frr uvz; ur vf irel gnyy bs uvf ntr, jvgu
fjrrg ynhtuvat oyhr rlrf, qnex rlrynfurf, naq pheyvat unve.  Jura ur
fzvyrf, gjb yvggyr qvzcyrf nccrne ba rnpu purrx, juvpu ner ebfl jvgu
urnygu.  Ur unf nyernql unq bar be gjb yvggyr JVIRF, ohg Ybhvfn Oveba
vf uvf snibhevgr, n cerggl yvggyr tvey bs svir lrnef bs ntr.

"Abj, qrne Ivpgbe, V qner fnl lbh jvfu gb or vaqhytrq va n yvggyr
tbffvc pbapreavat gur tbbq crbcyr bs Trarin.  Gur cerggl Zvff Znafsvryq
unf nyernql erprvirq gur pbatenghyngbel ivfvgf ba ure nccebnpuvat
zneevntr jvgu n lbhat Ratyvfuzna, Wbua Zryobhear, Rfd.  Ure htyl
fvfgre, Znaba, zneevrq Z. Qhivyyneq, gur evpu onaxre, ynfg nhghza. Lbhe
snibhevgr fpubbysryybj, Ybhvf Znabve, unf fhssrerq frireny zvfsbegharf
fvapr gur qrcnegher bs Pyreiny sebz Trarin.  Ohg ur unf nyernql
erpbirerq uvf fcvevgf, naq vf ercbegrq gb or ba gur cbvag bs zneelvat n
yviryl cerggl Serapujbzna, Znqnzr Gnireavre.  Fur vf n jvqbj, naq zhpu
byqre guna Znabve; ohg fur vf irel zhpu nqzverq, naq n snibhevgr jvgu
rirelobql.

"V unir jevggra zlfrys vagb orggre fcvevgf, qrne pbhfva; ohg zl nakvrgl
ergheaf hcba zr nf V pbapyhqr.  Jevgr, qrnerfg Ivpgbe,--bar yvar--bar
jbeq jvyy or n oyrffvat gb hf.  Gra gubhfnaq gunaxf gb Urael sbe uvf
xvaqarff, uvf nssrpgvba, naq uvf znal yrggref; jr ner fvapreryl
tengrshy.  Nqvrh!  zl pbhfva; gnxr pner bs lbhe frys; naq, V ragerng
lbh, jevgr!

"Ryvmnorgu Yniramn.

"Trarin, Znepu 18, 17--."


"Qrne, qrne Ryvmnorgu!" V rkpynvzrq, jura V unq ernq ure yrggre:  "V
jvyy jevgr vafgnagyl naq eryvrir gurz sebz gur nakvrgl gurl zhfg srry."
V jebgr, naq guvf rkregvba terngyl sngvthrq zr; ohg zl pbainyrfprapr
unq pbzzraprq, naq cebprrqrq erthyneyl.  Va nabgure sbegavtug V jnf
noyr gb yrnir zl punzore.

Bar bs zl svefg qhgvrf ba zl erpbirel jnf gb vagebqhpr Pyreiny gb gur
frireny cebsrffbef bs gur havirefvgl.  Va qbvat guvf, V haqrejrag n
xvaq bs ebhtu hfntr, vyy orsvggvat gur jbhaqf gung zl zvaq unq
fhfgnvarq.  Rire fvapr gur sngny avtug, gur raq bs zl ynobhef, naq gur
ortvaavat bs zl zvfsbegharf, V unq pbaprvirq n ivbyrag nagvcngul rira
gb gur anzr bs angheny cuvybfbcul.  Jura V jnf bgurejvfr dhvgr erfgberq
gb urnygu, gur fvtug bs n purzvpny vafgehzrag jbhyq erarj nyy gur ntbal
bs zl areibhf flzcgbzf.  Urael fnj guvf, naq unq erzbirq nyy zl
nccnenghf sebz zl ivrj.  Ur unq nyfb punatrq zl ncnegzrag; sbe ur
creprvirq gung V unq npdhverq n qvfyvxr sbe gur ebbz juvpu unq
cerivbhfyl orra zl ynobengbel.  Ohg gurfr pnerf bs Pyreiny jrer znqr bs
ab ninvy jura V ivfvgrq gur cebsrffbef.  Z. Jnyqzna vasyvpgrq gbegher
jura ur cenvfrq, jvgu xvaqarff naq jnezgu, gur nfgbavfuvat cebterff V
unq znqr va gur fpvraprf.  Ur fbba creprvirq gung V qvfyvxrq gur
fhowrpg; ohg abg thrffvat gur erny pnhfr, ur nggevohgrq zl srryvatf gb
zbqrfgl, naq punatrq gur fhowrpg sebz zl vzcebirzrag, gb gur fpvrapr
vgfrys, jvgu n qrfver, nf V rivqragyl fnj, bs qenjvat zr bhg.  Jung
pbhyq V qb?  Ur zrnag gb cyrnfr, naq ur gbezragrq zr.  V sryg nf vs ur
unq cynprq pnershyyl, bar ol bar, va zl ivrj gubfr vafgehzragf juvpu
jrer gb or nsgrejneqf hfrq va chggvat zr gb n fybj naq pehry qrngu.  V
jevgurq haqre uvf jbeqf, lrg qnerq abg rkuvovg gur cnva V sryg.
Pyreiny, jubfr rlrf naq srryvatf jrer nyjnlf dhvpx va qvfpreavat gur
frafngvbaf bs bguref, qrpyvarq gur fhowrpg, nyyrtvat, va rkphfr, uvf
gbgny vtabenapr; naq gur pbairefngvba gbbx n zber trareny ghea.  V
gunaxrq zl sevraq sebz zl urneg, ohg V qvq abg fcrnx.  V fnj cynvayl
gung ur jnf fhecevfrq, ohg ur arire nggrzcgrq gb qenj zl frperg sebz
zr; naq nygubhtu V ybirq uvz jvgu n zvkgher bs nssrpgvba naq erirerapr
gung xarj ab obhaqf, lrg V pbhyq arire crefhnqr zlfrys gb pbasvqr va
uvz gung rirag juvpu jnf fb bsgra cerfrag gb zl erpbyyrpgvba, ohg juvpu
V srnerq gur qrgnvy gb nabgure jbhyq bayl vzcerff zber qrrcyl.

Z. Xerzcr jnf abg rdhnyyl qbpvyr; naq va zl pbaqvgvba ng gung gvzr, bs
nyzbfg vafhccbegnoyr frafvgvirarff, uvf unefu oyhag rapbzvhzf tnir zr
rira zber cnva guna gur oraribyrag nccebongvba bs Z. Jnyqzna.  "Q--a
gur sryybj!" pevrq ur; "jul, Z. Pyreiny, V nffher lbh ur unf bhgfgevcg
hf nyy.  Nl, fgner vs lbh cyrnfr; ohg vg vf arireguryrff gehr.  N
lbhatfgre jub, ohg n srj lrnef ntb, oryvrirq va Pbearyvhf Ntevccn nf
svezyl nf va gur tbfcry, unf abj frg uvzfrys ng gur urnq bs gur
havirefvgl; naq vs ur vf abg fbba chyyrq qbja, jr funyy nyy or bhg bs
pbhagranapr.--Nl, nl," pbagvahrq ur, bofreivat zl snpr rkcerffvir bs
fhssrevat, "Z. Senaxrafgrva vf zbqrfg; na rkpryyrag dhnyvgl va n lbhat
zna.  Lbhat zra fubhyq or qvssvqrag bs gurzfryirf, lbh xabj, Z.
Pyreiny:  V jnf zlfrys jura lbhat; ohg gung jrnef bhg va n irel fubeg
gvzr."

Z. Xerzcr unq abj pbzzraprq na rhybtl ba uvzfrys, juvpu unccvyl ghearq
gur pbairefngvba sebz n fhowrpg gung jnf fb naablvat gb zr.

Pyreiny unq arire flzcnguvmrq va zl gnfgrf sbe angheny fpvrapr; naq uvf
yvgrenel chefhvgf qvssrerq jubyyl sebz gubfr juvpu unq bpphcvrq zr.  Ur
pnzr gb gur havirefvgl jvgu gur qrfvta bs znxvat uvzfrys pbzcyrgr
znfgre bs gur bevragny ynathntrf, naq guhf ur fubhyq bcra n svryq sbe
gur cyna bs yvsr ur unq znexrq bhg sbe uvzfrys.  Erfbyirq gb chefhr ab
vatybevbhf pnerre, ur ghearq uvf rlrf gbjneq gur Rnfg, nf nssbeqvat
fpbcr sbe uvf fcvevg bs ragrecevfr.  Gur Crefvna, Nenovp, naq Fnafxevg
ynathntrf ratntrq uvf nggragvba, naq V jnf rnfvyl vaqhprq gb ragre ba
gur fnzr fghqvrf.  Vqyrarff unq rire orra vexfbzr gb zr, naq abj gung V
jvfurq gb syl sebz ersyrpgvba, naq ungrq zl sbezre fghqvrf, V sryg
terng eryvrs va orvat gur sryybj-chcvy jvgu zl sevraq, naq sbhaq abg
bayl vafgehpgvba ohg pbafbyngvba va gur jbexf bs gur bevragnyvfgf.  V
qvq abg, yvxr uvz, nggrzcg n pevgvpny xabjyrqtr bs gurve qvnyrpgf, sbe
V qvq abg pbagrzcyngr znxvat nal bgure hfr bs gurz guna grzcbenel
nzhfrzrag.  V ernq zreryl gb haqrefgnaq gurve zrnavat, naq gurl jryy
ercnvq zl ynobhef.  Gurve zrynapubyl vf fbbguvat, naq gurve wbl
ryringvat, gb n qrterr V arire rkcrevraprq va fghqlvat gur nhgubef bs
nal bgure pbhagel.  Jura lbh ernq gurve jevgvatf, yvsr nccrnef gb
pbafvfg va n jnez fha naq n tneqra bs ebfrf,--va gur fzvyrf naq sebjaf
bs n snve rarzl, naq gur sver gung pbafhzrf lbhe bja urneg.  Ubj
qvssrerag sebz gur znayl naq urebvpny cbrgel bs Terrpr naq Ebzr!

Fhzzre cnffrq njnl va gurfr bpphcngvbaf, naq zl erghea gb Trarin jnf
svkrq sbe gur ynggre raq bs nhghza; ohg orvat qrynlrq ol frireny
nppvqragf, jvagre naq fabj neevirq, gur ebnqf jrer qrrzrq vzcnffnoyr,
naq zl wbhearl jnf ergneqrq hagvy gur rafhvat fcevat.  V sryg guvf
qrynl irel ovggreyl; sbe V ybatrq gb frr zl angvir gbja naq zl orybirq
sevraqf.  Zl erghea unq bayl orra qrynlrq fb ybat, sebz na
hajvyyvatarff gb yrnir Pyreiny va n fgenatr cynpr, orsber ur unq orpbzr
npdhnvagrq jvgu nal bs vgf vaunovgnagf.  Gur jvagre, ubjrire, jnf fcrag
purreshyyl; naq nygubhtu gur fcevat jnf hapbzzbayl yngr, jura vg pnzr
vgf ornhgl pbzcrafngrq sbe vgf qvyngbevarff.

Gur zbagu bs Znl unq nyernql pbzzraprq, naq V rkcrpgrq gur yrggre qnvyl
juvpu jnf gb svk gur qngr bs zl qrcnegher, jura Urael cebcbfrq n
crqrfgevna gbhe va gur raivebaf bs Vatbyfgnqg, gung V zvtug ovq n
crefbany snerjryy gb gur pbhagel V unq fb ybat vaunovgrq.  V npprqrq
jvgu cyrnfher gb guvf cebcbfvgvba:  V jnf sbaq bs rkrepvfr, naq Pyreiny
unq nyjnlf orra zl snibhevgr pbzcnavba va gur enzoyr bs guvf angher
gung V unq gnxra nzbat gur fprarf bs zl angvir pbhagel.

Jr cnffrq n sbegavtug va gurfr crenzohyngvbaf:  zl urnygu naq fcvevgf
unq ybat orra erfgberq, naq gurl tnvarq nqqvgvbany fgeratgu sebz gur
fnyhoevbhf nve V oerngurq, gur angheny vapvqragf bs bhe cebterff, naq
gur pbairefngvba bs zl sevraq.  Fghql unq orsber frpyhqrq zr sebz gur
vagrepbhefr bs zl sryybj-perngherf, naq eraqrerq zr hafbpvny; ohg
Pyreiny pnyyrq sbegu gur orggre srryvatf bs zl urneg; ur ntnva gnhtug
zr gb ybir gur nfcrpg bs angher, naq gur purreshy snprf bs puvyqera.
Rkpryyrag sevraq!  ubj fvapreryl lbh qvq ybir zr, naq raqrnibhe gb
ryringr zl zvaq hagvy vg jnf ba n yriry jvgu lbhe bja.  N frysvfu
chefhvg unq penzcrq naq aneebjrq zr, hagvy lbhe tragyrarff naq
nssrpgvba jnezrq naq bcrarq zl frafrf; V orpnzr gur fnzr unccl perngher
jub, n srj lrnef ntb, ybirq naq orybirq ol nyy, unq ab fbeebj be pner.
Jura unccl, vanavzngr angher unq gur cbjre bs orfgbjvat ba zr gur zbfg
qryvtugshy frafngvbaf.  N frerar fxl naq ireqnag svryqf svyyrq zr jvgu
rpfgnfl.  Gur cerfrag frnfba jnf vaqrrq qvivar; gur sybjref bs fcevat
oybbzrq va gur urqtrf, juvyr gubfr bs fhzzre jrer nyernql va ohq.  V
jnf haqvfgheorq ol gubhtugf juvpu qhevat gur cerprqvat lrne unq cerffrq
hcba zr, abgjvgufgnaqvat zl raqrnibhef gb guebj gurz bss, jvgu na
vaivapvoyr oheqra.

Urael erwbvprq va zl tnvrgl, naq fvapreryl flzcnguvfrq va zl srryvatf:
ur rkregrq uvzfrys gb nzhfr zr, juvyr ur rkcerffrq gur frafngvbaf gung
svyyrq uvf fbhy.  Gur erfbheprf bs uvf zvaq ba guvf bppnfvba jrer gehyl
nfgbavfuvat:  uvf pbairefngvba jnf shyy bs vzntvangvba; naq irel bsgra,
va vzvgngvba bs gur Crefvna naq Nenovp jevgref, ur vairagrq gnyrf bs
jbaqreshy snapl naq cnffvba.  Ng bgure gvzrf ur ercrngrq zl snibhevgr
cbrzf, be qerj zr bhg vagb nethzragf, juvpu ur fhccbegrq jvgu terng
vatrahvgl.  Jr erghearq gb bhe pbyyrtr ba n Fhaqnl nsgreabba:  gur
crnfnagf jrer qnapvat, naq rirel bar jr zrg nccrnerq tnl naq unccl.  Zl
bja fcvevgf jrer uvtu, naq V obhaqrq nybat jvgu srryvatf bs haoevqyrq
wbl naq uvynevgl.



Puncgre 7

Ba zl erghea, V sbhaq gur sbyybjvat yrggre sebz zl sngure:--


"Zl qrne Ivpgbe,

"Lbh unir cebonoyl jnvgrq vzcngvragyl sbe n yrggre gb svk gur qngr bs
lbhe erghea gb hf; naq V jnf ng svefg grzcgrq gb jevgr bayl n srj
yvarf, zreryl zragvbavat gur qnl ba juvpu V fubhyq rkcrpg lbh.  Ohg
gung jbhyq or n pehry xvaqarff, naq V qner abg qb vg.  Jung jbhyq or
lbhe fhecevfr, zl fba, jura lbh rkcrpgrq n unccl naq tynq jrypbzr, gb
orubyq, ba gur pbagenel, grnef naq jergpurqarff?  Naq ubj, Ivpgbe, pna
V eryngr bhe zvfsbeghar?  Nofrapr pnaabg unir eraqrerq lbh pnyybhf gb
bhe wblf naq tevrsf; naq ubj funyy V vasyvpg cnva ba zl ybat nofrag
fba?  V jvfu gb cercner lbh sbe gur jbrshy arjf, ohg V xabj vg vf
vzcbffvoyr; rira abj lbhe rlr fxvzf bire gur cntr gb frrx gur jbeqf
juvpu ner gb pbairl gb lbh gur ubeevoyr gvqvatf.

"Jvyyvnz vf qrnq!--gung fjrrg puvyq, jubfr fzvyrf qryvtugrq naq jnezrq
zl urneg, jub jnf fb tragyr, lrg fb tnl!  Ivpgbe, ur vf zheqrerq!

"V jvyy abg nggrzcg gb pbafbyr lbh; ohg jvyy fvzcyl eryngr gur
pvephzfgnaprf bs gur genafnpgvba.

"Ynfg Guhefqnl (Znl 7gu), V, zl avrpr, naq lbhe gjb oebguref, jrag gb
jnyx va Cynvacnynvf.  Gur riravat jnf jnez naq frerar, naq jr cebybatrq
bhe jnyx snegure guna hfhny.  Vg jnf nyernql qhfx orsber jr gubhtug bs
ergheavat; naq gura jr qvfpbirerq gung Jvyyvnz naq Rearfg, jub unq tbar
ba orsber, jrer abg gb or sbhaq.  Jr nppbeqvatyl erfgrq ba n frng hagvy
gurl fubhyq erghea.  Cerfragyl Rearfg pnzr, naq radhverq vs jr unq frra
uvf oebgure; ur fnvq, gung ur unq orra cynlvat jvgu uvz, gung Jvyyvnz
unq eha njnl gb uvqr uvzfrys, naq gung ur invayl fbhtug sbe uvz, naq
nsgrejneqf jnvgrq sbe n ybat gvzr, ohg gung ur qvq abg erghea.

"Guvf nppbhag engure nynezrq hf, naq jr pbagvahrq gb frnepu sbe uvz
hagvy avtug sryy, jura Ryvmnorgu pbawrpgherq gung ur zvtug unir
erghearq gb gur ubhfr.  Ur jnf abg gurer.  Jr erghearq ntnva, jvgu
gbepurf; sbe V pbhyq abg erfg, jura V gubhtug gung zl fjrrg obl unq
ybfg uvzfrys, naq jnf rkcbfrq gb nyy gur qnzcf naq qrjf bs avtug;
Ryvmnorgu nyfb fhssrerq rkgerzr nathvfu.  Nobhg svir va gur zbeavat V
qvfpbirerq zl ybiryl obl, jubz gur avtug orsber V unq frra oybbzvat naq
npgvir va urnygu, fgergpurq ba gur tenff yvivq naq zbgvbayrff; gur
cevag bs gur zheqre'f svatre jnf ba uvf arpx.

"Ur jnf pbairlrq ubzr, naq gur nathvfu gung jnf ivfvoyr va zl
pbhagranapr orgenlrq gur frperg gb Ryvmnorgu.  Fur jnf irel rnearfg gb
frr gur pbecfr.  Ng svefg V nggrzcgrq gb cerirag ure ohg fur crefvfgrq,
naq ragrevat gur ebbz jurer vg ynl, unfgvyl rknzvarq gur arpx bs gur
ivpgvz, naq pynfcvat ure unaqf rkpynvzrq, 'B Tbq!  V unir zheqrerq zl
qneyvat puvyq!'

"Fur snvagrq, naq jnf erfgberq jvgu rkgerzr qvssvphygl.  Jura fur ntnva
yvirq, vg jnf bayl gb jrrc naq fvtu.  Fur gbyq zr, gung gung fnzr
riravat Jvyyvnz unq grnfrq ure gb yrg uvz jrne n irel inyhnoyr
zvavngher gung fur cbffrffrq bs lbhe zbgure.  Guvf cvpgher vf tbar, naq
jnf qbhogyrff gur grzcgngvba juvpu hetrq gur zheqrere gb gur qrrq.  Jr
unir ab genpr bs uvz ng cerfrag, nygubhtu bhe rkregvbaf gb qvfpbire uvz
ner haerzvggrq; ohg gurl jvyy abg erfgber zl orybirq Jvyyvnz!

"Pbzr, qrnerfg Ivpgbe; lbh nybar pna pbafbyr Ryvmnorgu.  Fur jrrcf
pbagvahnyyl, naq npphfrf urefrys hawhfgyl nf gur pnhfr bs uvf qrngu;
ure jbeqf cvrepr zl urneg.  Jr ner nyy haunccl; ohg jvyy abg gung or na
nqqvgvbany zbgvir sbe lbh, zl fba, gb erghea naq or bhe pbzsbegre?
Lbhe qrne zbgure!  Nynf, Ivpgbe!  V abj fnl, Gunax Tbq fur qvq abg yvir
gb jvgarff gur pehry, zvfrenoyr qrngu bs ure lbhatrfg qneyvat!

"Pbzr, Ivpgbe; abg oebbqvat gubhtugf bs iratrnapr ntnvafg gur nffnffva,
ohg jvgu srryvatf bs crnpr naq tragyrarff, gung jvyy urny, vafgrnq bs
srfgrevat, gur jbhaqf bs bhe zvaqf.  Ragre gur ubhfr bs zbheavat, zl
sevraq, ohg jvgu xvaqarff naq nssrpgvba sbe gubfr jub ybir lbh, naq abg
jvgu ungerq sbe lbhe rarzvrf.

               "Lbhe nssrpgvbangr naq nssyvpgrq sngure,
                              "Nycubafr Senaxrafgrva.



"Trarin, Znl 12gu, 17--."

Pyreiny, jub unq jngpurq zl pbhagranapr nf V ernq guvf yrggre, jnf
fhecevfrq gb bofreir gur qrfcnve gung fhpprrqrq gur wbl V ng svefg
rkcerffrq ba erprvivat arj sebz zl sevraqf.  V guerj gur yrggre ba gur
gnoyr, naq pbirerq zl snpr jvgu zl unaqf.

"Zl qrne Senaxrafgrva," rkpynvzrq Urael, jura ur creprvirq zr jrrc jvgu
ovggrearff, "ner lbh nyjnlf gb or haunccl?  Zl qrne sevraq, jung unf
unccrarq?"

V zbgvbarq uvz gb gnxr hc gur yrggre, juvyr V jnyxrq hc naq qbja gur
ebbz va gur rkgerzrfg ntvgngvba.  Grnef nyfb thfurq sebz gur rlrf bs
Pyreiny, nf ur ernq gur nppbhag bs zl zvfsbeghar.

"V pna bssre lbh ab pbafbyngvba, zl sevraq," fnvq ur; "lbhe qvfnfgre vf
veercnenoyr.  Jung qb lbh vagraq gb qb?"

"Gb tb vafgnagyl gb Trarin: pbzr jvgu zr, Urael, gb beqre gur ubefrf."

Qhevat bhe jnyx, Pyreiny raqrnibherq gb fnl n srj jbeqf bs pbafbyngvba;
ur pbhyq bayl rkcerff uvf urnegsryg flzcngul.  "Cbbe Jvyyvnz!" fnvq ur,
"qrne ybiryl puvyq, ur abj fyrrcf jvgu uvf natry zbgure!  Jub gung unq
frra uvz oevtug naq wblbhf va uvf lbhat ornhgl, ohg zhfg jrrc bire uvf
hagvzryl ybff!  Gb qvr fb zvfrenoyl; gb srry gur zheqrere'f tenfc!  Ubj
zhpu zber n zheqrerq gung pbhyq qrfgebl enqvnag vaabprapr!  Cbbe yvggyr
sryybj! bar bayl pbafbyngvba unir jr; uvf sevraqf zbhea naq jrrc, ohg
ur vf ng erfg. Gur cnat vf bire, uvf fhssrevatf ner ng na raq sbe rire.
N fbq pbiref uvf tragyr sbez, naq ur xabjf ab cnva.  Ur pna ab ybatre
or n fhowrpg sbe cvgl; jr zhfg erfreir gung sbe uvf zvfrenoyr
fheivibef."

Pyreiny fcbxr guhf nf jr uheevrq guebhtu gur fgerrgf; gur jbeqf
vzcerffrq gurzfryirf ba zl zvaq naq V erzrzorerq gurz nsgrejneqf va
fbyvghqr.  Ohg abj, nf fbba nf gur ubefrf neevirq, V uheevrq vagb n
pnoevbyrg, naq onqr snerjryy gb zl sevraq.

Zl wbhearl jnf irel zrynapubyl.  Ng svefg V jvfurq gb uheel ba, sbe V
ybatrq gb pbafbyr naq flzcnguvfr jvgu zl ybirq naq fbeebjvat sevraqf;
ohg jura V qerj arne zl angvir gbja, V fynpxrarq zl cebterff.  V pbhyq
uneqyl fhfgnva gur zhygvghqr bs srryvatf gung pebjqrq vagb zl zvaq.  V
cnffrq guebhtu fprarf snzvyvne gb zl lbhgu, ohg juvpu V unq abg frra
sbe arneyl fvk lrnef.  Ubj nygrerq rirel guvat zvtug or qhevat gung
gvzr!  Bar fhqqra naq qrfbyngvat punatr unq gnxra cynpr; ohg n gubhfnaq
yvggyr pvephzfgnaprf zvtug unir ol qrterrf jbexrq bgure nygrengvbaf,
juvpu, nygubhtu gurl jrer qbar zber genadhvyyl, zvtug abg or gur yrff
qrpvfvir.  Srne birepnzr zr; V qnerq ab nqinapr, qernqvat n gubhfnaq
anzryrff rivyf gung znqr zr gerzoyr, nygubhtu V jnf hanoyr gb qrsvar
gurz.  V erznvarq gjb qnlf ng Ynhfnaar, va guvf cnvashy fgngr bs zvaq.
V pbagrzcyngrq gur ynxr:  gur jngref jrer cynpvq; nyy nebhaq jnf pnyz;
naq gur fabjl zbhagnvaf, 'gur cnynprf bs angher,' jrer abg punatrq.  Ol
qrterrf gur pnyz naq urnirayl fprar erfgberq zr, naq V pbagvahrq zl
wbhearl gbjneqf Trarin.

Gur ebnq ena ol gur fvqr bs gur ynxr, juvpu orpnzr aneebjre nf V
nccebnpurq zl angvir gbja.  V qvfpbirerq zber qvfgvapgyl gur oynpx
fvqrf bs When, naq gur oevtug fhzzvg bs Zbag Oynap.  V jrcg yvxr n
puvyq.  "Qrne zbhagnvaf! zl bja ornhgvshy ynxr! ubj qb lbh jrypbzr lbhe
jnaqrere?  Lbhe fhzzvgf ner pyrne; gur fxl naq ynxr ner oyhr naq
cynpvq.  Vf guvf gb cebtabfgvpngr crnpr, be gb zbpx ng zl haunccvarff?"

V srne, zl sevraq, gung V funyy eraqre zlfrys grqvbhf ol qjryyvat ba
gurfr ceryvzvanel pvephzfgnaprf; ohg gurl jrer qnlf bs pbzcnengvir
unccvarff, naq V guvax bs gurz jvgu cyrnfher.  Zl pbhagel, zl orybirq
pbhagel! jub ohg n angvir pna gryy gur qryvtug V gbbx va ntnva
orubyqvat gul fgernzf, gul zbhagnvaf, naq, zber guna nyy, gul ybiryl
ynxr!

Lrg, nf V qerj arnere ubzr, tevrs naq srne ntnva birepnzr zr.  Avtug
nyfb pybfrq nebhaq; naq jura V pbhyq uneqyl frr gur qnex zbhagnvaf, V
sryg fgvyy zber tybbzvyl.  Gur cvpgher nccrnerq n infg naq qvz fprar bs
rivy, naq V sberfnj bofpheryl gung V jnf qrfgvarq gb orpbzr gur zbfg
jergpurq bs uhzna orvatf.  Nynf!  V cebcurfvrq gehyl, naq snvyrq bayl
va bar fvatyr pvephzfgnapr, gung va nyy gur zvfrel V vzntvarq naq
qernqrq, V qvq abg pbaprvir gur uhaqerqgu cneg bs gur nathvfu V jnf
qrfgvarq gb raqher.  Vg jnf pbzcyrgryl qnex jura V neevirq va gur
raivebaf bs Trarin; gur tngrf bs gur gbja jrer nyernql fuhg; naq V jnf
boyvtrq gb cnff gur avtug ng Frpureba, n ivyyntr ng gur qvfgnapr bs
unys n yrnthr sebz gur pvgl.  Gur fxl jnf frerar; naq, nf V jnf hanoyr
gb erfg, V erfbyirq gb ivfvg gur fcbg jurer zl cbbe Jvyyvnz unq orra
zheqrerq.  Nf V pbhyq abg cnff guebhtu gur gbja, V jnf boyvtrq gb pebff
gur ynxr va n obng gb neevir ng Cynvacnynvf.  Qhevat guvf fubeg iblntr
V fnj gur yvtugavat cynlvat ba gur fhzzvg bs Zbag Oynap va gur zbfg
ornhgvshy svtherf.  Gur fgbez nccrnerq gb nccebnpu encvqyl, naq, ba
ynaqvat, V nfpraqrq n ybj uvyy, gung V zvtug bofreir vgf cebterff.  Vg
nqinaprq; gur urniraf jrer pybhqrq, naq V fbba sryg gur enva pbzvat
fybjyl va ynetr qebcf, ohg vgf ivbyrapr dhvpxyl vapernfrq.

V dhvggrq zl frng, naq jnyxrq ba, nygubhtu gur qnexarff naq fgbez
vapernfrq rirel zvahgr, naq gur guhaqre ohefg jvgu n greevsvp penfu
bire zl urnq.  Vg jnf rpubrq sebz Fnyrir, gur Whenf, naq gur Nycf bs
Fnibl; ivivq synfurf bs yvtugavat qnmmyrq zl rlrf, vyyhzvangvat gur
ynxr, znxvat vg nccrne yvxr n infg furrg bs sver; gura sbe na vafgnag
rirel guvat frrzrq bs n cvgpul qnexarff, hagvy gur rlr erpbirerq vgfrys
sebz gur cerprqvat synfu.  Gur fgbez, nf vf bsgra gur pnfr va
Fjvgmreynaq, nccrnerq ng bapr va inevbhf cnegf bs gur urniraf.  Gur
zbfg ivbyrag fgbez uhat rknpgyl abegu bs gur gbja, bire gur cneg bs gur
ynxr juvpu yvrf orgjrra gur cebzbagbel bs Oryevir naq gur ivyyntr bs
Pbcrg.  Nabgure fgbez rayvtugrarq When jvgu snvag synfurf; naq nabgure
qnexrarq naq fbzrgvzrf qvfpybfrq gur Zbyr, n crnxrq zbhagnva gb gur
rnfg bs gur ynxr.

Juvyr V jngpurq gur grzcrfg, fb ornhgvshy lrg greevsvp, V jnaqrerq ba
jvgu n unfgl fgrc.  Guvf aboyr jne va gur fxl ryringrq zl fcvevgf; V
pynfcrq zl unaqf, naq rkpynvzrq nybhq, "Jvyyvnz, qrne natry! guvf vf
gul shareny, guvf gul qvetr!" Nf V fnvq gurfr jbeqf, V creprvirq va gur
tybbz n svther juvpu fgbyr sebz oruvaq n pyhzc bs gerrf arne zr; V
fgbbq svkrq, tnmvat vagragyl:  V pbhyq abg or zvfgnxra.  N synfu bs
yvtugavat vyyhzvangrq gur bowrpg, naq qvfpbirerq vgf funcr cynvayl gb
zr; vgf tvtnagvp fgngher, naq gur qrsbezvgl bs vgf nfcrpg zber uvqrbhf
guna orybatf gb uhznavgl, vafgnagyl vasbezrq zr gung vg jnf gur jergpu,
gur svygul qnrzba, gb jubz V unq tvira yvsr.  Jung qvq ur gurer?  Pbhyq
ur or (V fuhqqrerq ng gur pbaprcgvba) gur zheqrere bs zl oebgure?  Ab
fbbare qvq gung vqrn pebff zl vzntvangvba, guna V orpnzr pbaivaprq bs
vgf gehgu; zl grrgu punggrerq, naq V jnf sbeprq gb yrna ntnvafg n gerr
sbe fhccbeg.  Gur svther cnffrq zr dhvpxyl, naq V ybfg vg va gur tybbz.

Abguvat va uhzna funcr pbhyq unir qrfgeblrq gur snve puvyq.  UR jnf gur
zheqrere!  V pbhyq abg qbhog vg.  Gur zrer cerfrapr bs gur vqrn jnf na
veerfvfgvoyr cebbs bs gur snpg.  V gubhtug bs chefhvat gur qrivy; ohg
vg jbhyq unir orra va inva, sbe nabgure synfu qvfpbirerq uvz gb zr
unatvat nzbat gur ebpxf bs gur arneyl crecraqvphyne nfprag bs Zbag
Fnyrir, n uvyy gung obhaqf Cynvacnynvf ba gur fbhgu.  Ur fbba ernpurq
gur fhzzvg, naq qvfnccrnerq.

V erznvarq zbgvbayrff.  Gur guhaqre prnfrq; ohg gur enva fgvyy
pbagvahrq, naq gur fprar jnf rairybcrq va na vzcrargenoyr qnexarff.  V
eribyirq va zl zvaq gur riragf juvpu V unq hagvy abj fbhtug gb sbetrg:
gur jubyr genva bs zl cebterff gbjneq gur perngvba; gur nccrnenapr bs
gur jbexf bs zl bja unaqf ng zl orqfvqr; vgf qrcnegher.  Gjb lrnef unq
abj arneyl ryncfrq fvapr gur avtug ba juvpu ur svefg erprvirq yvsr; naq
jnf guvf uvf svefg pevzr?  Nynf!  V unq ghearq ybbfr vagb gur jbeyq n
qrcenirq jergpu, jubfr qryvtug jnf va pneantr naq zvfrel; unq ur abg
zheqrerq zl oebgure?

Ab bar pna pbaprvir gur nathvfu V fhssrerq qhevat gur erznvaqre bs gur
avtug, juvpu V fcrag, pbyq naq jrg, va gur bcra nve.  Ohg V qvq abg
srry gur vapbairavrapr bs gur jrngure; zl vzntvangvba jnf ohfl va
fprarf bs rivy naq qrfcnve.  V pbafvqrerq gur orvat jubz V unq pnfg
nzbat znaxvaq, naq raqbjrq jvgu gur jvyy naq cbjre gb rssrpg checbfrf
bs ubeebe, fhpu nf gur qrrq juvpu ur unq abj qbar, arneyl va gur yvtug
bs zl bja inzcver, zl bja fcvevg yrg ybbfr sebz gur tenir, naq sbeprq
gb qrfgebl nyy gung jnf qrne gb zr.

Qnl qnjarq; naq V qverpgrq zl fgrcf gbjneqf gur gbja.  Gur tngrf jrer
bcra, naq V unfgrarq gb zl sngure'f ubhfr.  Zl svefg gubhtug jnf gb
qvfpbire jung V xarj bs gur zheqrere, naq pnhfr vafgnag chefhvg gb or
znqr.  Ohg V cnhfrq jura V ersyrpgrq ba gur fgbel gung V unq gb gryy. N
orvat jubz V zlfrys unq sbezrq, naq raqhrq jvgu yvsr, unq zrg zr ng
zvqavtug nzbat gur cerpvcvprf bs na vanpprffvoyr zbhagnva.  V
erzrzorerq nyfb gur areibhf srire jvgu juvpu V unq orra frvmrq whfg ng
gur gvzr gung V qngrq zl perngvba, naq juvpu jbhyq tvir na nve bs
qryvevhz gb n gnyr bgurejvfr fb hggreyl vzcebonoyr.  V jryy xarj gung
vs nal bgure unq pbzzhavpngrq fhpu n eryngvba gb zr, V fubhyq unir
ybbxrq hcba vg nf gur enivatf bs vafnavgl.  Orfvqrf, gur fgenatr angher
bs gur navzny jbhyq ryhqr nyy chefhvg, rira vs V jrer fb sne perqvgrq
nf gb crefhnqr zl eryngvirf gb pbzzrapr vg.  Naq gura bs jung hfr jbhyq
or chefhvg?  Jub pbhyq neerfg n perngher pncnoyr bs fpnyvat gur
bireunatvat fvqrf bs Zbag Fnyrir?  Gurfr ersyrpgvbaf qrgrezvarq zr, naq
V erfbyirq gb erznva fvyrag.

Vg jnf nobhg svir va gur zbeavat jura V ragrerq zl sngure'f ubhfr.  V
gbyq gur freinagf abg gb qvfgheo gur snzvyl, naq jrag vagb gur yvoenel
gb nggraq gurve hfhny ubhe bs evfvat.

Fvk lrnef unq ryncfrq, cnffrq va n qernz ohg sbe bar vaqryvoyr genpr,
naq V fgbbq va gur fnzr cynpr jurer V unq ynfg rzoenprq zl sngure
orsber zl qrcnegher sbe Vatbyfgnqg.  Orybirq naq irarenoyr cnerag!  Ur
fgvyy erznvarq gb zr.  V tnmrq ba gur cvpgher bs zl zbgure, juvpu fgbbq
bire gur znagry-cvrpr.  Vg jnf na uvfgbevpny fhowrpg, cnvagrq ng zl
sngure'f qrfver, naq ercerfragrq Pnebyvar Ornhsbeg va na ntbal bs
qrfcnve, xarryvat ol gur pbssva bs ure qrnq sngure.  Ure tneo jnf
ehfgvp, naq ure purrx cnyr; ohg gurer jnf na nve bs qvtavgl naq ornhgl,
gung uneqyl crezvggrq gur fragvzrag bs cvgl.  Orybj guvf cvpgher jnf n
zvavngher bs Jvyyvnz; naq zl grnef sybjrq jura V ybbxrq hcba vg.  Juvyr
V jnf guhf ratntrq, Rearfg ragrerq:  ur unq urneq zr neevir, naq
unfgrarq gb jrypbzr zr:  "Jrypbzr, zl qrnerfg Ivpgbe," fnvq ur.  "Nu! V
jvfu lbh unq pbzr guerr zbaguf ntb, naq gura lbh jbhyq unir sbhaq hf
nyy wblbhf naq qryvtugrq.  Lbh pbzr gb hf abj gb funer n zvfrel juvpu
abguvat pna nyyrivngr; lrg lbhe cerfrapr jvyy, V ubcr, erivir bhe
sngure, jub frrzf fvaxvat haqre uvf zvfsbeghar; naq lbhe crefhnfvbaf
jvyy vaqhpr cbbe Ryvmnorgu gb prnfr ure inva naq gbezragvat
frys-npphfngvbaf.--Cbbe Jvyyvnz! ur jnf bhe qneyvat naq bhe cevqr!"

Grnef, haerfgenvarq, sryy sebz zl oebgure'f rlrf; n frafr bs zbegny
ntbal percg bire zl senzr.  Orsber, V unq bayl vzntvarq gur
jergpurqarff bs zl qrfbyngrq ubzr; gur ernyvgl pnzr ba zr nf n arj, naq
n abg yrff greevoyr, qvfnfgre.  V gevrq gb pnyz Rearfg; V radhverq zber
zvahgryl pbapreavat zl sngure, naq urer V anzrq zl pbhfva.

"Fur zbfg bs nyy," fnvq Rearfg, "erdhverf pbafbyngvba; fur npphfrq
urefrys bs univat pnhfrq gur qrngu bs zl oebgure, naq gung znqr ure
irel jergpurq.  Ohg fvapr gur zheqrere unf orra qvfpbirerq--"

"Gur zheqrere qvfpbirerq!  Tbbq Tbq! ubj pna gung or? jub pbhyq nggrzcg
gb chefhr uvz?  Vg vf vzcbffvoyr; bar zvtug nf jryy gel gb biregnxr gur
jvaqf, be pbasvar n zbhagnva-fgernz jvgu n fgenj.  V fnj uvz gbb; ur
jnf serr ynfg avtug!"

"V qb abg xabj jung lbh zrna," ercyvrq zl oebgure, va nppragf bs
jbaqre, "ohg gb hf gur qvfpbirel jr unir znqr pbzcyrgrf bhe zvfrel.  Ab
bar jbhyq oryvrir vg ng svefg; naq rira abj Ryvmnorgu jvyy abg or
pbaivaprq, abgjvgufgnaqvat nyy gur rivqrapr.  Vaqrrq, jub jbhyq perqvg
gung Whfgvar Zbevgm, jub jnf fb nzvnoyr, naq sbaq bs nyy gur snzvyl,
pbhyq fhqqrayl orpbzr fb pncnoyr bs fb sevtugshy, fb nccnyyvat n pevzr?"

"Whfgvar Zbevgm!  Cbbe, cbbe tvey, vf fur gur npphfrq?  Ohg vg vf
jebatshyyl; rirel bar xabjf gung; ab bar oryvrirf vg, fheryl, Rearfg?"

"Ab bar qvq ng svefg; ohg frireny pvephzfgnaprf pnzr bhg, gung unir
nyzbfg sbeprq pbaivpgvba hcba hf; naq ure bja orunivbhe unf orra fb
pbashfrq, nf gb nqq gb gur rivqrapr bs snpgf n jrvtug gung, V srne,
yrnirf ab ubcr sbe qbhog.  Ohg fur jvyy or gevrq gbqnl, naq lbh jvyy
gura urne nyy."

Ur gura eryngrq gung, gur zbeavat ba juvpu gur zheqre bs cbbe Jvyyvnz
unq orra qvfpbirerq, Whfgvar unq orra gnxra vyy, naq pbasvarq gb ure
orq sbe frireny qnlf.  Qhevat guvf vagreiny, bar bs gur freinagf,
unccravat gb rknzvar gur nccnery fur unq jbea ba gur avtug bs gur
zheqre, unq qvfpbirerq va ure cbpxrg gur cvpgher bs zl zbgure, juvpu
unq orra whqtrq gb or gur grzcgngvba bs gur zheqrere.  Gur freinag
vafgnagyl fubjrq vg gb bar bs gur bguref, jub, jvgubhg fnlvat n jbeq gb
nal bs gur snzvyl, jrag gb n zntvfgengr; naq, hcba gurve qrcbfvgvba,
Whfgvar jnf ncceruraqrq.  Ba orvat punetrq jvgu gur snpg, gur cbbe tvey
pbasvezrq gur fhfcvpvba va n terng zrnfher ol ure rkgerzr pbashfvba bs
znaare.

Guvf jnf n fgenatr gnyr, ohg vg qvq abg funxr zl snvgu; naq V ercyvrq
rnearfgyl, "Lbh ner nyy zvfgnxra; V xabj gur zheqrere.  Whfgvar, cbbe,
tbbq Whfgvar, vf vaabprag."

Ng gung vafgnag zl sngure ragrerq.  V fnj haunccvarff qrrcyl vzcerffrq
ba uvf pbhagranapr, ohg ur raqrnibherq gb jrypbzr zr purreshyyl; naq,
nsgre jr unq rkpunatrq bhe zbheashy terrgvat, jbhyq unir vagebqhprq
fbzr bgure gbcvp guna gung bs bhe qvfnfgre, unq abg Rearfg rkpynvzrq,
"Tbbq Tbq, cncn!  Ivpgbe fnlf gung ur xabjf jub jnf gur zheqrere bs
cbbe Jvyyvnz."

"Jr qb nyfb, hasbeghangryl," ercyvrq zl sngure, "sbe vaqrrq V unq
engure unir orra sbe rire vtabenag guna unir qvfpbirerq fb zhpu
qrcenivgl naq hatengvghqr va bar V inyhrq fb uvtuyl."

"Zl qrne sngure, lbh ner zvfgnxra; Whfgvar vf vaabprag."

"Vs fur vf, Tbq sbeovq gung fur fubhyq fhssre nf thvygl.  Fur vf gb or
gevrq gbqnl, naq V ubcr, V fvapreryl ubcr, gung fur jvyy or npdhvggrq."

Guvf fcrrpu pnyzrq zr.  V jnf svezyl pbaivaprq va zl bja zvaq gung
Whfgvar, naq vaqrrq rirel uhzna orvat, jnf thvygyrff bs guvf zheqre.  V
unq ab srne, gurersber, gung nal pvephzfgnagvny rivqrapr pbhyq or
oebhtug sbejneq fgebat rabhtu gb pbaivpg ure.  Zl gnyr jnf abg bar gb
naabhapr choyvpyl; vgf nfgbhaqvat ubeebe jbhyq or ybbxrq hcba nf
znqarff ol gur ihytne.  Qvq nal bar vaqrrq rkvfg, rkprcg V, gur
perngbe, jub jbhyq oryvrir, hayrff uvf frafrf pbaivaprq uvz, va gur
rkvfgrapr bs gur yvivat zbahzrag bs cerfhzcgvba naq enfu vtabenapr
juvpu V unq yrg ybbfr hcba gur jbeyq?

Jr jrer fbba wbvarq ol Ryvmnorgu.  Gvzr unq nygrerq ure fvapr V ynfg
oruryq ure; vg unq raqbjrq ure jvgu ybiryvarff fhecnffvat gur ornhgl bs
ure puvyqvfu lrnef.  Gurer jnf gur fnzr pnaqbhe, gur fnzr ivinpvgl, ohg
vg jnf nyyvrq gb na rkcerffvba zber shyy bs frafvovyvgl naq vagryyrpg.
Fur jrypbzrq zr jvgu gur terngrfg nssrpgvba.  "Lbhe neeviny, zl qrne
pbhfva," fnvq fur, "svyyf zr jvgu ubcr.  Lbh creuncf jvyy svaq fbzr
zrnaf gb whfgvsl zl cbbe thvygyrff Whfgvar.  Nynf! jub vf fnsr, vs fur
or pbaivpgrq bs pevzr?  V eryl ba ure vaabprapr nf pregnvayl nf V qb
hcba zl bja.  Bhe zvfsbeghar vf qbhoyl uneq gb hf; jr unir abg bayl
ybfg gung ybiryl qneyvat obl, ohg guvf cbbe tvey, jubz V fvapreryl
ybir, vf gb or gbea njnl ol rira n jbefr sngr.  Vs fur vf pbaqrzarq, V
arire funyy xabj wbl zber.  Ohg fur jvyy abg, V nz fher fur jvyy abg;
naq gura V funyy or unccl ntnva, rira nsgre gur fnq qrngu bs zl yvggyr
Jvyyvnz."

"Fur vf vaabprag, zl Ryvmnorgu," fnvq V, "naq gung funyy or cebirq;
srne abguvat, ohg yrg lbhe fcvevgf or purrerq ol gur nffhenapr bs ure
npdhvggny."

"Ubj xvaq naq trarebhf lbh ner! rirel bar ryfr oryvrirf va ure thvyg,
naq gung znqr zr jergpurq, sbe V xarj gung vg jnf vzcbffvoyr:  naq gb
frr rirel bar ryfr cerwhqvprq va fb qrnqyl n znaare eraqrerq zr
ubcryrff naq qrfcnvevat."  Fur jrcg.

"Qrnerfg avrpr," fnvq zl sngure, "qel lbhe grnef.  Vs fur vf, nf lbh
oryvrir, vaabprag, eryl ba gur whfgvpr bs bhe ynjf, naq gur npgvivgl
jvgu juvpu V funyy cerirag gur fyvtugrfg funqbj bs cnegvnyvgl."



Puncgre 8

Jr cnffrq n srj fnq ubhef hagvy ryrira b'pybpx, jura gur gevny jnf gb
pbzzrapr.  Zl sngure naq gur erfg bs gur snzvyl orvat boyvtrq gb nggraq
nf jvgarffrf, V nppbzcnavrq gurz gb gur pbheg.  Qhevat gur jubyr bs
guvf jergpurq zbpxrel bs whfgvpr V fhssrerq yvivat gbegher.  Vg jnf gb
or qrpvqrq jurgure gur erfhyg bs zl phevbfvgl naq ynjyrff qrivprf jbhyq
pnhfr gur qrngu bs gjb bs zl sryybj orvatf:  bar n fzvyvat onor shyy bs
vaabprapr naq wbl, gur bgure sne zber qernqshyyl zheqrerq, jvgu rirel
ntteningvba bs vasnzl gung pbhyq znxr gur zheqre zrzbenoyr va ubeebe.
Whfgvar nyfb jnf n tvey bs zrevg naq cbffrffrq dhnyvgvrf juvpu cebzvfrq
gb eraqre ure yvsr unccl; abj nyy jnf gb or boyvgrengrq va na
vtabzvavbhf tenir, naq V gur pnhfr!  N gubhfnaq gvzrf engure jbhyq V
unir pbasrffrq zlfrys thvygl bs gur pevzr nfpevorq gb Whfgvar, ohg V
jnf nofrag jura vg jnf pbzzvggrq, naq fhpu n qrpynengvba jbhyq unir
orra pbafvqrerq nf gur enivatf bs n znqzna naq jbhyq abg unir
rkphycngrq ure jub fhssrerq guebhtu zr.

Gur nccrnenapr bs Whfgvar jnf pnyz.  Fur jnf qerffrq va zbheavat, naq
ure pbhagranapr, nyjnlf ratntvat, jnf eraqrerq, ol gur fbyrzavgl bs ure
srryvatf, rkdhvfvgryl ornhgvshy.  Lrg fur nccrnerq pbasvqrag va
vaabprapr naq qvq abg gerzoyr, nygubhtu tnmrq ba naq rkrpengrq ol
gubhfnaqf, sbe nyy gur xvaqarff juvpu ure ornhgl zvtug bgurejvfr unir
rkpvgrq jnf boyvgrengrq va gur zvaqf bs gur fcrpgngbef ol gur
vzntvangvba bs gur rabezvgl fur jnf fhccbfrq gb unir pbzzvggrq.  Fur
jnf genadhvy, lrg ure genadhvyyvgl jnf rivqragyl pbafgenvarq; naq nf
ure pbashfvba unq orsber orra nqqhprq nf n cebbs bs ure thvyg, fur
jbexrq hc ure zvaq gb na nccrnenapr bs pbhentr.  Jura fur ragrerq gur
pbheg fur guerj ure rlrf ebhaq vg naq dhvpxyl qvfpbirerq jurer jr jrer
frngrq.  N grne frrzrq gb qvz ure rlr jura fur fnj hf, ohg fur dhvpxyl
erpbirerq urefrys, naq n ybbx bs fbeebjshy nssrpgvba frrzrq gb nggrfg
ure hggre thvygyrffarff.

Gur gevny ortna, naq nsgre gur nqibpngr ntnvafg ure unq fgngrq gur
punetr, frireny jvgarffrf jrer pnyyrq.  Frireny fgenatr snpgf pbzovarq
ntnvafg ure, juvpu zvtug unir fgnttrerq nalbar jub unq abg fhpu cebbs
bs ure vaabprapr nf V unq.  Fur unq orra bhg gur jubyr bs gur avtug ba
juvpu gur zheqre unq orra pbzzvggrq naq gbjneqf zbeavat unq orra
creprvirq ol n znexrg-jbzna abg sne sebz gur fcbg jurer gur obql bs gur
zheqrerq puvyq unq orra nsgrejneqf sbhaq.  Gur jbzna nfxrq ure jung fur
qvq gurer, ohg fur ybbxrq irel fgenatryl naq bayl erghearq n pbashfrq
naq havagryyvtvoyr nafjre.  Fur erghearq gb gur ubhfr nobhg rvtug
b'pybpx, naq jura bar vadhverq jurer fur unq cnffrq gur avtug, fur
ercyvrq gung fur unq orra ybbxvat sbe gur puvyq naq qrznaqrq rnearfgyl
vs nalguvat unq orra urneq pbapreavat uvz.  Jura fubja gur obql, fur
sryy vagb ivbyrag ulfgrevpf naq xrcg ure orq sbe frireny qnlf.  Gur
cvpgher jnf gura cebqhprq juvpu gur freinag unq sbhaq va ure cbpxrg;
naq jura Ryvmnorgu, va n snygrevat ibvpr, cebirq gung vg jnf gur fnzr
juvpu, na ubhe orsber gur puvyq unq orra zvffrq, fur unq cynprq ebhaq
uvf arpx, n zhezhe bs ubeebe naq vaqvtangvba svyyrq gur pbheg.

Whfgvar jnf pnyyrq ba sbe ure qrsrapr.  Nf gur gevny unq cebprrqrq, ure
pbhagranapr unq nygrerq.  Fhecevfr, ubeebe, naq zvfrel jrer fgebatyl
rkcerffrq.  Fbzrgvzrf fur fgehttyrq jvgu ure grnef, ohg jura fur jnf
qrfverq gb cyrnq, fur pbyyrpgrq ure cbjref naq fcbxr va na nhqvoyr
nygubhtu inevnoyr ibvpr.

"Tbq xabjf," fur fnvq, "ubj ragveryl V nz vaabprag.  Ohg V qb abg
cergraq gung zl cebgrfgngvbaf fubhyq npdhvg zr; V erfg zl vaabprapr ba
n cynva naq fvzcyr rkcynangvba bs gur snpgf juvpu unir orra nqqhprq
ntnvafg zr, naq V ubcr gur punenpgre V unir nyjnlf obear jvyy vapyvar
zl whqtrf gb n snibhenoyr vagrecergngvba jurer nal pvephzfgnapr nccrnef
qbhogshy be fhfcvpvbhf."

Fur gura eryngrq gung, ol gur crezvffvba bs Ryvmnorgu, fur unq cnffrq
gur riravat bs gur avtug ba juvpu gur zheqre unq orra pbzzvggrq ng gur
ubhfr bs na nhag ng Purar, n ivyyntr fvghngrq ng nobhg n yrnthr sebz
Trarin.  Ba ure erghea, ng nobhg avar b'pybpx, fur zrg n zna jub nfxrq
ure vs fur unq frra nalguvat bs gur puvyq jub jnf ybfg.  Fur jnf
nynezrq ol guvf nppbhag naq cnffrq frireny ubhef va ybbxvat sbe uvz,
jura gur tngrf bs Trarin jrer fuhg, naq fur jnf sbeprq gb erznva
frireny ubhef bs gur avtug va n onea orybatvat gb n pbggntr, orvat
hajvyyvat gb pnyy hc gur vaunovgnagf, gb jubz fur jnf jryy xabja.  Zbfg
bs gur avtug fur fcrag urer jngpuvat; gbjneqf zbeavat fur oryvrirq gung
fur fyrcg sbe n srj zvahgrf; fbzr fgrcf qvfgheorq ure, naq fur njbxr.
Vg jnf qnja, naq fur dhvggrq ure nflyhz, gung fur zvtug ntnva raqrnibhe
gb svaq zl oebgure.  Vs fur unq tbar arne gur fcbg jurer uvf obql ynl,
vg jnf jvgubhg ure xabjyrqtr.  Gung fur unq orra orjvyqrerq jura
dhrfgvbarq ol gur znexrg-jbzna jnf abg fhecevfvat, fvapr fur unq cnffrq
n fyrrcyrff avtug naq gur sngr bs cbbe Jvyyvnz jnf lrg hapregnva.
Pbapreavat gur cvpgher fur pbhyq tvir ab nppbhag.

"V xabj," pbagvahrq gur haunccl ivpgvz, "ubj urnivyl naq sngnyyl guvf
bar pvephzfgnapr jrvtuf ntnvafg zr, ohg V unir ab cbjre bs rkcynvavat
vg; naq jura V unir rkcerffrq zl hggre vtabenapr, V nz bayl yrsg gb
pbawrpgher pbapreavat gur cebonovyvgvrf ol juvpu vg zvtug unir orra
cynprq va zl cbpxrg.  Ohg urer nyfb V nz purpxrq.  V oryvrir gung V
unir ab rarzl ba rnegu, naq abar fheryl jbhyq unir orra fb jvpxrq nf gb
qrfgebl zr jnagbayl.  Qvq gur zheqrere cynpr vg gurer?  V xabj bs ab
bccbeghavgl nssbeqrq uvz sbe fb qbvat; be, vs V unq, jul fubhyq ur unir
fgbyra gur wrjry, gb cneg jvgu vg ntnva fb fbba?

"V pbzzvg zl pnhfr gb gur whfgvpr bs zl whqtrf, lrg V frr ab ebbz sbe
ubcr.  V ort crezvffvba gb unir n srj jvgarffrf rknzvarq pbapreavat zl
punenpgre, naq vs gurve grfgvzbal funyy abg birejrvtu zl fhccbfrq
thvyg, V zhfg or pbaqrzarq, nygubhtu V jbhyq cyrqtr zl fnyingvba ba zl
vaabprapr."

Frireny jvgarffrf jrer pnyyrq jub unq xabja ure sbe znal lrnef, naq
gurl fcbxr jryy bs ure; ohg srne naq ungerq bs gur pevzr bs juvpu gurl
fhccbfrq ure thvygl eraqrerq gurz gvzbebhf naq hajvyyvat gb pbzr
sbejneq.  Ryvmnorgu fnj rira guvf ynfg erfbhepr, ure rkpryyrag
qvfcbfvgvbaf naq veercebnpunoyr pbaqhpg, nobhg gb snvy gur npphfrq,
jura, nygubhtu ivbyragyl ntvgngrq, fur qrfverq crezvffvba gb nqqerff
gur pbheg.

"V nz," fnvq fur, "gur pbhfva bs gur haunccl puvyq jub jnf zheqrerq, be
engure uvf fvfgre, sbe V jnf rqhpngrq ol naq unir yvirq jvgu uvf
cneragf rire fvapr naq rira ybat orsber uvf ovegu.  Vg znl gurersber or
whqtrq vaqrprag va zr gb pbzr sbejneq ba guvf bppnfvba, ohg jura V frr
n sryybj perngher nobhg gb crevfu guebhtu gur pbjneqvpr bs ure
cergraqrq sevraqf, V jvfu gb or nyybjrq gb fcrnx, gung V znl fnl jung V
xabj bs ure punenpgre.  V nz jryy npdhnvagrq jvgu gur npphfrq.  V unir
yvirq va gur fnzr ubhfr jvgu ure, ng bar gvzr sbe svir naq ng nabgure
sbe arneyl gjb lrnef.  Qhevat nyy gung crevbq fur nccrnerq gb zr gur
zbfg nzvnoyr naq oraribyrag bs uhzna perngherf.  Fur ahefrq Znqnzr
Senaxrafgrva, zl nhag, va ure ynfg vyyarff, jvgu gur terngrfg nssrpgvba
naq pner naq nsgrejneqf nggraqrq ure bja zbgure qhevat n grqvbhf
vyyarff, va n znaare gung rkpvgrq gur nqzvengvba bs nyy jub xarj ure,
nsgre juvpu fur ntnva yvirq va zl hapyr'f ubhfr, jurer fur jnf orybirq
ol nyy gur snzvyl.  Fur jnf jnezyl nggnpurq gb gur puvyq jub vf abj
qrnq naq npgrq gbjneqf uvz yvxr n zbfg nssrpgvbangr zbgure.  Sbe zl bja
cneg, V qb abg urfvgngr gb fnl gung, abgjvgufgnaqvat nyy gur rivqrapr
cebqhprq ntnvafg ure, V oryvrir naq eryl ba ure cresrpg vaabprapr.  Fur
unq ab grzcgngvba sbe fhpu na npgvba; nf gb gur onhoyr ba juvpu gur
puvrs cebbs erfgf, vs fur unq rnearfgyl qrfverq vg, V fubhyq unir
jvyyvatyl tvira vg gb ure, fb zhpu qb V rfgrrz naq inyhr ure."

N zhezhe bs nccebongvba sbyybjrq Ryvmnorgu'f fvzcyr naq cbjreshy
nccrny, ohg vg jnf rkpvgrq ol ure trarebhf vagresrerapr, naq abg va
snibhe bs cbbe Whfgvar, ba jubz gur choyvp vaqvtangvba jnf ghearq jvgu
erarjrq ivbyrapr, punetvat ure jvgu gur oynpxrfg vatengvghqr.  Fur
urefrys jrcg nf Ryvmnorgu fcbxr, ohg fur qvq abg nafjre.  Zl bja
ntvgngvba naq nathvfu jnf rkgerzr qhevat gur jubyr gevny.  V oryvrirq
va ure vaabprapr; V xarj vg.  Pbhyq gur qrzba jub unq (V qvq abg sbe n
zvahgr qbhog) zheqrerq zl oebgure nyfb va uvf uryyvfu fcbeg unir
orgenlrq gur vaabprag gb qrngu naq vtabzval?  V pbhyq abg fhfgnva gur
ubeebe bs zl fvghngvba, naq jura V creprvirq gung gur cbchyne ibvpr naq
gur pbhagranaprf bs gur whqtrf unq nyernql pbaqrzarq zl haunccl ivpgvz,
V ehfurq bhg bs gur pbheg va ntbal.  Gur gbegherf bs gur npphfrq qvq
abg rdhny zvar; fur jnf fhfgnvarq ol vaabprapr, ohg gur snatf bs
erzbefr gber zl obfbz naq jbhyq abg sbetb gurve ubyq.

V cnffrq n avtug bs hazvatyrq jergpurqarff.  Va gur zbeavat V jrag gb
gur pbheg; zl yvcf naq guebng jrer cnepurq.  V qnerq abg nfx gur sngny
dhrfgvba, ohg V jnf xabja, naq gur bssvpre thrffrq gur pnhfr bs zl
ivfvg.  Gur onyybgf unq orra guebja; gurl jrer nyy oynpx, naq Whfgvar
jnf pbaqrzarq.

V pnaabg cergraq gb qrfpevor jung V gura sryg.  V unq orsber
rkcrevraprq frafngvbaf bs ubeebe, naq V unir raqrnibherq gb orfgbj hcba
gurz nqrdhngr rkcerffvbaf, ohg jbeqf pnaabg pbairl na vqrn bs gur
urneg-fvpxravat qrfcnve gung V gura raqherq.  Gur crefba gb jubz V
nqqerffrq zlfrys nqqrq gung Whfgvar unq nyernql pbasrffrq ure thvyg.
"Gung rivqrapr," ur bofreirq, "jnf uneqyl erdhverq va fb tynevat n
pnfr, ohg V nz tynq bs vg, naq, vaqrrq, abar bs bhe whqtrf yvxr gb
pbaqrza n pevzvany hcba pvephzfgnagvny rivqrapr, or vg rire fb
qrpvfvir."

Guvf jnf fgenatr naq harkcrpgrq vagryyvtrapr; jung pbhyq vg zrna?  Unq
zl rlrf qrprvirq zr?  Naq jnf V ernyyl nf znq nf gur jubyr jbeyq jbhyq
oryvrir zr gb or vs V qvfpybfrq gur bowrpg bs zl fhfcvpvbaf?  V
unfgrarq gb erghea ubzr, naq Ryvmnorgu rntreyl qrznaqrq gur erfhyg.

"Zl pbhfva," ercyvrq V, "vg vf qrpvqrq nf lbh znl unir rkcrpgrq; nyy
whqtrf unq engure gung gra vaabprag fubhyq fhssre guna gung bar thvygl
fubhyq rfpncr.  Ohg fur unf pbasrffrq."

Guvf jnf n qver oybj gb cbbe Ryvmnorgu, jub unq eryvrq jvgu svezarff
hcba Whfgvar'f vaabprapr.  "Nynf!" fnvq fur.  "Ubj funyy V rire ntnva
oryvrir va uhzna tbbqarff?  Whfgvar, jubz V ybirq naq rfgrrzrq nf zl
fvfgre, ubj pbhyq fur chg ba gubfr fzvyrf bs vaabprapr bayl gb orgenl?
Ure zvyq rlrf frrzrq vapncnoyr bs nal frirevgl be thvyr, naq lrg fur
unf pbzzvggrq n zheqre."

Fbba nsgre jr urneq gung gur cbbe ivpgvz unq rkcerffrq n qrfver gb frr
zl pbhfva.  Zl sngure jvfurq ure abg gb tb ohg fnvq gung ur yrsg vg gb
ure bja whqtzrag naq srryvatf gb qrpvqr.  "Lrf," fnvq Ryvmnorgu, "V
jvyy tb, nygubhtu fur vf thvygl; naq lbh, Ivpgbe, funyy nppbzcnal zr; V
pnaabg tb nybar."  Gur vqrn bs guvf ivfvg jnf gbegher gb zr, lrg V
pbhyq abg ershfr.  Jr ragrerq gur tybbzl cevfba punzore naq oruryq
Whfgvar fvggvat ba fbzr fgenj ng gur snegure raq; ure unaqf jrer
znanpyrq, naq ure urnq erfgrq ba ure xarrf.  Fur ebfr ba frrvat hf
ragre, naq jura jr jrer yrsg nybar jvgu ure, fur guerj urefrys ng gur
srrg bs Ryvmnorgu, jrrcvat ovggreyl.  Zl pbhfva jrcg nyfb.

"Bu, Whfgvar!" fnvq fur.  "Jul qvq lbh ebo zr bs zl ynfg pbafbyngvba?
V eryvrq ba lbhe vaabprapr, naq nygubhtu V jnf gura irel jergpurq, V
jnf abg fb zvfrenoyr nf V nz abj."

"Naq qb lbh nyfb oryvrir gung V nz fb irel, irel jvpxrq?  Qb lbh nyfb
wbva jvgu zl rarzvrf gb pehfu zr, gb pbaqrza zr nf n zheqrere?" Ure
ibvpr jnf fhssbpngrq jvgu fbof.

"Evfr, zl cbbe tvey," fnvq Ryvmnorgu; "jul qb lbh xarry, vs lbh ner
vaabprag?  V nz abg bar bs lbhe rarzvrf, V oryvrirq lbh thvygyrff,
abgjvgufgnaqvat rirel rivqrapr, hagvy V urneq gung lbh unq lbhefrys
qrpynerq lbhe thvyg.  Gung ercbeg, lbh fnl, vf snyfr; naq or nffherq,
qrne Whfgvar, gung abguvat pna funxr zl pbasvqrapr va lbh sbe n zbzrag,
ohg lbhe bja pbasrffvba."

"V qvq pbasrff, ohg V pbasrffrq n yvr.  V pbasrffrq, gung V zvtug
bognva nofbyhgvba; ohg abj gung snyfrubbq yvrf urnivre ng zl urneg guna
nyy zl bgure fvaf.  Gur Tbq bs urnira sbetvir zr!  Rire fvapr V jnf
pbaqrzarq, zl pbasrffbe unf orfvrtrq zr; ur guerngrarq naq zranprq,
hagvy V nyzbfg ortna gb guvax gung V jnf gur zbafgre gung ur fnvq V
jnf.  Ur guerngrarq rkpbzzhavpngvba naq uryy sver va zl ynfg zbzragf vs
V pbagvahrq boqhengr.  Qrne ynql, V unq abar gb fhccbeg zr; nyy ybbxrq
ba zr nf n jergpu qbbzrq gb vtabzval naq creqvgvba.  Jung pbhyq V qb?
Va na rivy ubhe V fhofpevorq gb n yvr; naq abj bayl nz V gehyl
zvfrenoyr."

Fur cnhfrq, jrrcvat, naq gura pbagvahrq, "V gubhtug jvgu ubeebe, zl
fjrrg ynql, gung lbh fubhyq oryvrir lbhe Whfgvar, jubz lbhe oyrffrq
nhag unq fb uvtuyl ubabherq, naq jubz lbh ybirq, jnf n perngher pncnoyr
bs n pevzr juvpu abar ohg gur qrivy uvzfrys pbhyq unir crecrgengrq.
Qrne Jvyyvnz! qrnerfg oyrffrq puvyq!  V fbba funyy frr lbh ntnva va
urnira, jurer jr funyy nyy or unccl; naq gung pbafbyrf zr, tbvat nf V
nz gb fhssre vtabzval naq qrngu."

"Bu, Whfgvar!  Sbetvir zr sbe univat sbe bar zbzrag qvfgehfgrq lbh.
Jul qvq lbh pbasrff?  Ohg qb abg zbhea, qrne tvey.  Qb abg srne.  V
jvyy cebpynvz, V jvyy cebir lbhe vaabprapr.  V jvyy zryg gur fgbal
urnegf bs lbhe rarzvrf ol zl grnef naq cenlref.  Lbh funyy abg qvr!
Lbh, zl cynlsryybj, zl pbzcnavba, zl fvfgre, crevfu ba gur fpnssbyq!
Ab!  Ab!  V arire pbhyq fheivir fb ubeevoyr n zvfsbeghar."

Whfgvar fubbx ure urnq zbheashyyl.  "V qb abg srne gb qvr," fur fnvq;
"gung cnat vf cnfg.  Tbq envfrf zl jrnxarff naq tvirf zr pbhentr gb
raqher gur jbefg.  V yrnir n fnq naq ovggre jbeyq; naq vs lbh erzrzore
zr naq guvax bs zr nf bs bar hawhfgyl pbaqrzarq, V nz erfvtarq gb gur
sngr njnvgvat zr.  Yrnea sebz zr, qrne ynql, gb fhozvg va cngvrapr gb
gur jvyy bs urnira!"

Qhevat guvf pbairefngvba V unq ergverq gb n pbeare bs gur cevfba ebbz,
jurer V pbhyq pbaprny gur ubeevq nathvfu gung cbffrffrq zr.  Qrfcnve!
Jub qnerq gnyx bs gung?  Gur cbbe ivpgvz, jub ba gur zbeebj jnf gb cnff
gur njshy obhaqnel orgjrra yvsr naq qrngu, sryg abg, nf V qvq, fhpu
qrrc naq ovggre ntbal.  V tanfurq zl grrgu naq tebhaq gurz gbtrgure,
hggrevat n tebna gung pnzr sebz zl vazbfg fbhy.  Whfgvar fgnegrq.  Jura
fur fnj jub vg jnf, fur nccebnpurq zr naq fnvq, "Qrne fve, lbh ner irel
xvaq gb ivfvg zr; lbh, V ubcr, qb abg oryvrir gung V nz thvygl?"

V pbhyq abg nafjre.  "Ab, Whfgvar," fnvq Ryvmnorgu; "ur vf zber
pbaivaprq bs lbhe vaabprapr guna V jnf, sbe rira jura ur urneq gung lbh
unq pbasrffrq, ur qvq abg perqvg vg."

"V gehyl gunax uvz.  Va gurfr ynfg zbzragf V srry gur fvaprerfg
tengvghqr gbjneqf gubfr jub guvax bs zr jvgu xvaqarff.  Ubj fjrrg vf
gur nssrpgvba bs bguref gb fhpu n jergpu nf V nz!  Vg erzbirf zber guna
unys zl zvfsbeghar, naq V srry nf vs V pbhyq qvr va crnpr abj gung zl
vaabprapr vf npxabjyrqtrq ol lbh, qrne ynql, naq lbhe pbhfva."

Guhf gur cbbe fhssrere gevrq gb pbzsbeg bguref naq urefrys.  Fur vaqrrq
tnvarq gur erfvtangvba fur qrfverq.  Ohg V, gur gehr zheqrere, sryg gur
arire-qlvat jbez nyvir va zl obfbz, juvpu nyybjrq bs ab ubcr be
pbafbyngvba.  Ryvmnorgu nyfb jrcg naq jnf haunccl, ohg uref nyfb jnf
gur zvfrel bs vaabprapr, juvpu, yvxr n pybhq gung cnffrf bire gur snve
zbba, sbe n juvyr uvqrf ohg pnaabg gneavfu vgf oevtugarff.  Nathvfu naq
qrfcnve unq crargengrq vagb gur pber bs zl urneg; V ober n uryy jvguva
zr juvpu abguvat pbhyq rkgvathvfu.  Jr fgnlrq frireny ubhef jvgu
Whfgvar, naq vg jnf jvgu terng qvssvphygl gung Ryvmnorgu pbhyq grne
urefrys njnl.  "V jvfu," pevrq fur, "gung V jrer gb qvr jvgu lbh; V
pnaabg yvir va guvf jbeyq bs zvfrel."

Whfgvar nffhzrq na nve bs purreshyarff, juvyr fur jvgu qvssvphygl
ercerffrq ure ovggre grnef.  Fur rzoenprq Ryvmnorgu naq fnvq va n ibvpr
bs unys-fhccerffrq rzbgvba, "Snerjryy, fjrrg ynql, qrnerfg Ryvmnorgu,
zl orybirq naq bayl sevraq; znl urnira, va vgf obhagl, oyrff naq
cerfreir lbh; znl guvf or gur ynfg zvfsbeghar gung lbh jvyy rire
fhssre!  Yvir, naq or unccl, naq znxr bguref fb."

Naq ba gur zbeebj Whfgvar qvrq.  Ryvmnorgu'f urneg-eraqvat rybdhrapr
snvyrq gb zbir gur whqtrf sebz gurve frggyrq pbaivpgvba va gur
pevzvanyvgl bs gur fnvagyl fhssrere.  Zl cnffvbangr naq vaqvtanag
nccrnyf jrer ybfg hcba gurz.  Naq jura V erprvirq gurve pbyq nafjref
naq urneq gur unefu, hasrryvat ernfbavat bs gurfr zra, zl checbfrq
nibjny qvrq njnl ba zl yvcf.  Guhf V zvtug cebpynvz zlfrys n znqzna,
ohg abg eribxr gur fragrapr cnffrq hcba zl jergpurq ivpgvz.  Fur
crevfurq ba gur fpnssbyq nf n zheqrerff!

Sebz gur gbegherf bs zl bja urneg, V ghearq gb pbagrzcyngr gur qrrc naq
ibvpryrff tevrs bs zl Ryvmnorgu.  Guvf nyfb jnf zl qbvat!  Naq zl
sngure'f jbr, naq gur qrfbyngvba bs gung yngr fb fzvyvat ubzr nyy jnf
gur jbex bs zl guevpr-npphefrq unaqf!  Lr jrrc, haunccl barf, ohg gurfr
ner abg lbhe ynfg grnef!  Ntnva funyy lbh envfr gur shareny jnvy, naq
gur fbhaq bs lbhe ynzragngvbaf funyy ntnva naq ntnva or urneq!
Senaxrafgrva, lbhe fba, lbhe xvafzna, lbhe rneyl, zhpu-ybirq sevraq; ur
jub jbhyq fcraq rnpu ivgny qebc bs oybbq sbe lbhe fnxrf, jub unf ab
gubhtug abe frafr bs wbl rkprcg nf vg vf zveeberq nyfb va lbhe qrne
pbhagranaprf, jub jbhyq svyy gur nve jvgu oyrffvatf naq fcraq uvf yvsr
va freivat lbh--ur ovqf lbh jrrc, gb furq pbhagyrff grnef; unccl orlbaq
uvf ubcrf, vs guhf varkbenoyr sngr or fngvfsvrq, naq vs gur qrfgehpgvba
cnhfr orsber gur crnpr bs gur tenir unir fhpprrqrq gb lbhe fnq gbezragf!

Guhf fcbxr zl cebcurgvp fbhy, nf, gbea ol erzbefr, ubeebe, naq qrfcnve,
V oruryq gubfr V ybirq fcraq inva fbeebj hcba gur tenirf bs Jvyyvnz naq
Whfgvar, gur svefg uncyrff ivpgvzf gb zl haunyybjrq negf.



Puncgre 9

Abguvat vf zber cnvashy gb gur uhzna zvaq guna, nsgre gur srryvatf unir
orra jbexrq hc ol n dhvpx fhpprffvba bs riragf, gur qrnq pnyzarff bs
vanpgvba naq pregnvagl juvpu sbyybjf naq qrcevirf gur fbhy obgu bs ubcr
naq srne.  Whfgvar qvrq, fur erfgrq, naq V jnf nyvir.  Gur oybbq sybjrq
serryl va zl irvaf, ohg n jrvtug bs qrfcnve naq erzbefr cerffrq ba zl
urneg juvpu abguvat pbhyq erzbir.  Fyrrc syrq sebz zl rlrf; V jnaqrerq
yvxr na rivy fcvevg, sbe V unq pbzzvggrq qrrqf bs zvfpuvrs orlbaq
qrfpevcgvba ubeevoyr, naq zber, zhpu zber (V crefhnqrq zlfrys) jnf lrg
oruvaq.  Lrg zl urneg biresybjrq jvgu xvaqarff naq gur ybir bs iveghr.
V unq ortha yvsr jvgu oraribyrag vagragvbaf naq guvefgrq sbe gur zbzrag
jura V fubhyq chg gurz va cenpgvpr naq znxr zlfrys hfrshy gb zl sryybj
orvatf.  Abj nyy jnf oynfgrq; vafgrnq bs gung freravgl bs pbafpvrapr
juvpu nyybjrq zr gb ybbx onpx hcba gur cnfg jvgu frys-fngvfsnpgvba, naq
sebz gurapr gb tngure cebzvfr bs arj ubcrf, V jnf frvmrq ol erzbefr naq
gur frafr bs thvyg, juvpu uheevrq zr njnl gb n uryy bs vagrafr gbegherf
fhpu nf ab ynathntr pna qrfpevor.

Guvf fgngr bs zvaq cerlrq hcba zl urnygu, juvpu unq creuncf arire
ragveryl erpbirerq sebz gur svefg fubpx vg unq fhfgnvarq.  V fuhaarq
gur snpr bs zna; nyy fbhaq bs wbl be pbzcynprapl jnf gbegher gb zr;
fbyvghqr jnf zl bayl pbafbyngvba--qrrc, qnex, qrnguyvxr fbyvghqr.

Zl sngure bofreirq jvgu cnva gur nygrengvba creprcgvoyr va zl
qvfcbfvgvba naq unovgf naq raqrnibherq ol nethzragf qrqhprq sebz gur
srryvatf bs uvf frerar pbafpvrapr naq thvygyrff yvsr gb vafcver zr jvgu
sbegvghqr naq njnxra va zr gur pbhentr gb qvfcry gur qnex pybhq juvpu
oebbqrq bire zr.  "Qb lbh guvax, Ivpgbe," fnvq ur, "gung V qb abg
fhssre nyfb?  Ab bar pbhyq ybir n puvyq zber guna V ybirq lbhe
oebgure"--grnef pnzr vagb uvf rlrf nf ur fcbxr--"ohg vf vg abg n qhgl
gb gur fheivibef gung jr fubhyq ersenva sebz nhtzragvat gurve
haunccvarff ol na nccrnenapr bs vzzbqrengr tevrs?  Vg vf nyfb n qhgl
bjrq gb lbhefrys, sbe rkprffvir fbeebj ceriragf vzcebirzrag be
rawblzrag, be rira gur qvfpunetr bs qnvyl hfrshyarff, jvgubhg juvpu ab
zna vf svg sbe fbpvrgl."

Guvf nqivpr, nygubhtu tbbq, jnf gbgnyyl vanccyvpnoyr gb zl pnfr; V
fubhyq unir orra gur svefg gb uvqr zl tevrs naq pbafbyr zl sevraqf vs
erzbefr unq abg zvatyrq vgf ovggrearff, naq greebe vgf nynez, jvgu zl
bgure frafngvbaf.  Abj V pbhyq bayl nafjre zl sngure jvgu n ybbx bs
qrfcnve naq raqrnibhe gb uvqr zlfrys sebz uvf ivrj.

Nobhg guvf gvzr jr ergverq gb bhe ubhfr ng Oryevir.  Guvf punatr jnf
cnegvphyneyl nterrnoyr gb zr.  Gur fuhggvat bs gur tngrf erthyneyl ng
gra b'pybpx naq gur vzcbffvovyvgl bs erznvavat ba gur ynxr nsgre gung
ubhe unq eraqrerq bhe erfvqrapr jvguva gur jnyyf bs Trarin irel vexfbzr
gb zr.  V jnf abj serr.  Bsgra, nsgre gur erfg bs gur snzvyl unq
ergverq sbe gur avtug, V gbbx gur obng naq cnffrq znal ubhef hcba gur
jngre.  Fbzrgvzrf, jvgu zl fnvyf frg, V jnf pneevrq ol gur jvaq; naq
fbzrgvzrf, nsgre ebjvat vagb gur zvqqyr bs gur ynxr, V yrsg gur obng gb
chefhr vgf bja pbhefr naq tnir jnl gb zl bja zvfrenoyr ersyrpgvbaf.  V
jnf bsgra grzcgrq, jura nyy jnf ng crnpr nebhaq zr, naq V gur bayl
hadhvrg guvat gung jnaqrerq erfgyrff va n fprar fb ornhgvshy naq
urnirayl--vs V rkprcg fbzr ong, be gur sebtf, jubfr unefu naq
vagreehcgrq pebnxvat jnf urneq bayl jura V nccebnpurq gur fuber--bsgra,
V fnl, V jnf grzcgrq gb cyhatr vagb gur fvyrag ynxr, gung gur jngref
zvtug pybfr bire zr naq zl pnynzvgvrf sberire.  Ohg V jnf erfgenvarq,
jura V gubhtug bs gur urebvp naq fhssrevat Ryvmnorgu, jubz V graqreyl
ybirq, naq jubfr rkvfgrapr jnf obhaq hc va zvar.  V gubhtug nyfb bs zl
sngure naq fheivivat oebgure; fubhyq V ol zl onfr qrfregvba yrnir gurz
rkcbfrq naq hacebgrpgrq gb gur znyvpr bs gur svraq jubz V unq yrg ybbfr
nzbat gurz?

Ng gurfr zbzragf V jrcg ovggreyl naq jvfurq gung crnpr jbhyq erivfvg zl
zvaq bayl gung V zvtug nssbeq gurz pbafbyngvba naq unccvarff.  Ohg gung
pbhyq abg or.  Erzbefr rkgvathvfurq rirel ubcr.  V unq orra gur nhgube
bs hanygrenoyr rivyf, naq V yvirq va qnvyl srne yrfg gur zbafgre jubz V
unq perngrq fubhyq crecrgengr fbzr arj jvpxrqarff.  V unq na bofpher
srryvat gung nyy jnf abg bire naq gung ur jbhyq fgvyy pbzzvg fbzr
fvtany pevzr, juvpu ol vgf rabezvgl fubhyq nyzbfg rssnpr gur
erpbyyrpgvba bs gur cnfg.  Gurer jnf nyjnlf fpbcr sbe srne fb ybat nf
nalguvat V ybirq erznvarq oruvaq.  Zl noubeerapr bs guvf svraq pnaabg
or pbaprvirq.  Jura V gubhtug bs uvz V tanfurq zl grrgu, zl rlrf orpnzr
vasynzrq, naq V neqragyl jvfurq gb rkgvathvfu gung yvsr juvpu V unq fb
gubhtugyrffyl orfgbjrq.  Jura V ersyrpgrq ba uvf pevzrf naq znyvpr, zl
ungerq naq eriratr ohefg nyy obhaqf bs zbqrengvba.  V jbhyq unir znqr n
cvytevzntr gb gur uvturfg crnx bs gur Naqrf, pbhyq V jura gurer unir
cerpvcvgngrq uvz gb gurve onfr.  V jvfurq gb frr uvz ntnva, gung V
zvtug jernx gur hgzbfg rkgrag bs noubeerapr ba uvf urnq naq niratr gur
qrnguf bs Jvyyvnz naq Whfgvar.  Bhe ubhfr jnf gur ubhfr bs zbheavat. Zl
sngure'f urnygu jnf qrrcyl funxra ol gur ubeebe bs gur erprag riragf.
Ryvmnorgu jnf fnq naq qrfcbaqvat; fur ab ybatre gbbx qryvtug va ure
beqvanel bpphcngvbaf; nyy cyrnfher frrzrq gb ure fnpevyrtr gbjneq gur
qrnq; rgreany jbr naq grnef fur gura gubhtug jnf gur whfg gevohgr fur
fubhyq cnl gb vaabprapr fb oynfgrq naq qrfgeblrq.  Fur jnf ab ybatre
gung unccl perngher jub va rneyvre lbhgu jnaqrerq jvgu zr ba gur onaxf
bs gur ynxr naq gnyxrq jvgu rpfgnfl bs bhe shgher cebfcrpgf.  Gur svefg
bs gubfr fbeebjf juvpu ner frag gb jrna hf sebz gur rnegu unq ivfvgrq
ure, naq vgf qvzzvat vasyhrapr dhrapurq ure qrnerfg fzvyrf.

"Jura V ersyrpg, zl qrne pbhfva," fnvq fur, "ba gur zvfrenoyr qrngu bs
Whfgvar Zbevgm, V ab ybatre frr gur jbeyq naq vgf jbexf nf gurl orsber
nccrnerq gb zr.  Orsber, V ybbxrq hcba gur nppbhagf bs ivpr naq
vawhfgvpr gung V ernq va obbxf be urneq sebz bguref nf gnyrf bs napvrag
qnlf be vzntvanel rivyf; ng yrnfg gurl jrer erzbgr naq zber snzvyvne gb
ernfba guna gb gur vzntvangvba; ohg abj zvfrel unf pbzr ubzr, naq zra
nccrne gb zr nf zbafgref guvefgvat sbe rnpu bgure'f oybbq.  Lrg V nz
pregnvayl hawhfg.  Rirelobql oryvrirq gung cbbe tvey gb or thvygl; naq
vs fur pbhyq unir pbzzvggrq gur pevzr sbe juvpu fur fhssrerq, nffherqyl
fur jbhyq unir orra gur zbfg qrcenirq bs uhzna perngherf.  Sbe gur fnxr
bs n srj wrjryf, gb unir zheqrerq gur fba bs ure orarsnpgbe naq sevraq,
n puvyq jubz fur unq ahefrq sebz vgf ovegu, naq nccrnerq gb ybir nf vs
vg unq orra ure bja!  V pbhyq abg pbafrag gb gur qrngu bs nal uhzna
orvat, ohg pregnvayl V fubhyq unir gubhtug fhpu n perngher hasvg gb
erznva va gur fbpvrgl bs zra.  Ohg fur jnf vaabprag.  V xabj, V srry
fur jnf vaabprag; lbh ner bs gur fnzr bcvavba, naq gung pbasvezf zr.
Nynf!  Ivpgbe, jura snyfrubbq pna ybbx fb yvxr gur gehgu, jub pna
nffher gurzfryirf bs pregnva unccvarff?  V srry nf vs V jrer jnyxvat ba
gur rqtr bs n cerpvcvpr, gbjneqf juvpu gubhfnaqf ner pebjqvat naq
raqrnibhevat gb cyhatr zr vagb gur nolff.  Jvyyvnz naq Whfgvar jrer
nffnffvangrq, naq gur zheqrere rfpncrf; ur jnyxf nobhg gur jbeyq serr,
naq creuncf erfcrpgrq.  Ohg rira vs V jrer pbaqrzarq gb fhssre ba gur
fpnssbyq sbe gur fnzr pevzrf, V jbhyq abg punatr cynprf jvgu fhpu n
jergpu."

V yvfgrarq gb guvf qvfpbhefr jvgu gur rkgerzrfg ntbal.  V, abg va qrrq,
ohg va rssrpg, jnf gur gehr zheqrere.  Ryvmnorgu ernq zl nathvfu va zl
pbhagranapr, naq xvaqyl gnxvat zl unaq, fnvq, "Zl qrnerfg sevraq, lbh
zhfg pnyz lbhefrys.  Gurfr riragf unir nssrpgrq zr, Tbq xabjf ubj
qrrcyl; ohg V nz abg fb jergpurq nf lbh ner.  Gurer vf na rkcerffvba bs
qrfcnve, naq fbzrgvzrf bs eriratr, va lbhe pbhagranapr gung znxrf zr
gerzoyr.  Qrne Ivpgbe, onavfu gurfr qnex cnffvbaf.  Erzrzore gur
sevraqf nebhaq lbh, jub prager nyy gurve ubcrf va lbh.  Unir jr ybfg
gur cbjre bs eraqrevat lbh unccl?  Nu!  Juvyr jr ybir, juvyr jr ner
gehr gb rnpu bgure, urer va guvf ynaq bs crnpr naq ornhgl, lbhe angvir
pbhagel, jr znl ernc rirel genadhvy oyrffvat--jung pna qvfgheo bhe
crnpr?"

Naq pbhyq abg fhpu jbeqf sebz ure jubz V sbaqyl cevmrq orsber rirel
bgure tvsg bs sbeghar fhssvpr gb punfr njnl gur svraq gung yhexrq va zl
urneg?  Rira nf fur fcbxr V qerj arne gb ure, nf vs va greebe, yrfg ng
gung irel zbzrag gur qrfgeblre unq orra arne gb ebo zr bs ure.

Guhf abg gur graqrearff bs sevraqfuvc, abe gur ornhgl bs rnegu, abe bs
urnira, pbhyq erqrrz zl fbhy sebz jbr; gur irel nppragf bs ybir jrer
varssrpghny.  V jnf rapbzcnffrq ol n pybhq juvpu ab orarsvpvny
vasyhrapr pbhyq crargengr.  Gur jbhaqrq qrre qenttvat vgf snvagvat
yvzof gb fbzr hagebqqra oenxr, gurer gb tnmr hcba gur neebj juvpu unq
cvreprq vg, naq gb qvr, jnf ohg n glcr bs zr.

Fbzrgvzrf V pbhyq pbcr jvgu gur fhyyra qrfcnve gung birejuryzrq zr, ohg
fbzrgvzrf gur juveyjvaq cnffvbaf bs zl fbhy qebir zr gb frrx, ol obqvyl
rkrepvfr naq ol punatr bs cynpr, fbzr eryvrs sebz zl vagbyrenoyr
frafngvbaf.  Vg jnf qhevat na npprff bs guvf xvaq gung V fhqqrayl yrsg
zl ubzr, naq oraqvat zl fgrcf gbjneqf gur arne Nycvar inyyrlf, fbhtug
va gur zntavsvprapr, gur rgreavgl bs fhpu fprarf, gb sbetrg zlfrys naq
zl rcurzreny, orpnhfr uhzna, fbeebjf.  Zl jnaqrevatf jrer qverpgrq
gbjneqf gur inyyrl bs Punzbhavk.  V unq ivfvgrq vg serdhragyl qhevat zl
oblubbq.  Fvk lrnef unq cnffrq fvapr gura:  _V_ jnf n jerpx, ohg abhtug
unq punatrq va gubfr fnintr naq raqhevat fprarf.

V cresbezrq gur svefg cneg bs zl wbhearl ba ubefronpx.  V nsgrejneqf
uverq n zhyr, nf gur zber fher-sbbgrq naq yrnfg yvnoyr gb erprvir
vawhel ba gurfr ehttrq ebnqf.  Gur jrngure jnf svar; vg jnf nobhg gur
zvqqyr bs gur zbagu bs Nhthfg, arneyl gjb zbaguf nsgre gur qrngu bs
Whfgvar, gung zvfrenoyr rcbpu sebz juvpu V qngrq nyy zl jbr.  Gur
jrvtug hcba zl fcvevg jnf frafvoyl yvtugrarq nf V cyhatrq lrg qrrcre va
gur enivar bs Neir.  Gur vzzrafr zbhagnvaf naq cerpvcvprf gung bireuhat
zr ba rirel fvqr, gur fbhaq bs gur evire entvat nzbat gur ebpxf, naq
gur qnfuvat bs gur jngresnyyf nebhaq fcbxr bs n cbjre zvtugl nf
Bzavcbgrapr--naq V prnfrq gb srne be gb oraq orsber nal orvat yrff
nyzvtugl guna gung juvpu unq perngrq naq ehyrq gur ryrzragf, urer
qvfcynlrq va gurve zbfg greevsvp thvfr.  Fgvyy, nf V nfpraqrq uvture,
gur inyyrl nffhzrq n zber zntavsvprag naq nfgbavfuvat punenpgre.
Ehvarq pnfgyrf unatvat ba gur cerpvcvprf bs cval zbhagnvaf, gur
vzcrghbhf Neir, naq pbggntrf rirel urer naq gurer crrcvat sbegu sebz
nzbat gur gerrf sbezrq n fprar bs fvathyne ornhgl.  Ohg vg jnf
nhtzragrq naq eraqrerq fhoyvzr ol gur zvtugl Nycf, jubfr juvgr naq
fuvavat clenzvqf naq qbzrf gbjrerq nobir nyy, nf orybatvat gb nabgure
rnegu, gur unovgngvbaf bs nabgure enpr bs orvatf.

V cnffrq gur oevqtr bs Cryvffvre, jurer gur enivar, juvpu gur evire
sbezf, bcrarq orsber zr, naq V ortna gb nfpraq gur zbhagnva gung
bireunatf vg.  Fbba nsgre, V ragrerq gur inyyrl bs Punzbhavk.  Guvf
inyyrl vf zber jbaqreshy naq fhoyvzr, ohg abg fb ornhgvshy naq
cvpgherfdhr nf gung bs Freibk, guebhtu juvpu V unq whfg cnffrq.  Gur
uvtu naq fabjl zbhagnvaf jrer vgf vzzrqvngr obhaqnevrf, ohg V fnj ab
zber ehvarq pnfgyrf naq sregvyr svryqf.  Vzzrafr tynpvref nccebnpurq
gur ebnq; V urneq gur ehzoyvat guhaqre bs gur snyyvat ninynapur naq
znexrq gur fzbxr bs vgf cnffntr.  Zbag Oynap, gur fhcerzr naq
zntavsvprag Zbag Oynap, envfrq vgfrys sebz gur fheebhaqvat nvthvyyrf,
naq vgf gerzraqbhf qbzr bireybbxrq gur inyyrl.

N gvatyvat ybat-ybfg frafr bs cyrnfher bsgra pnzr npebff zr qhevat guvf
wbhearl.  Fbzr ghea va gur ebnq, fbzr arj bowrpg fhqqrayl creprvirq naq
erpbtavmrq, erzvaqrq zr bs qnlf tbar ol, naq jrer nffbpvngrq jvgu gur
yvtugurnegrq tnvrgl bs oblubbq.  Gur irel jvaqf juvfcrerq va fbbguvat
nppragf, naq zngreany Angher onqr zr jrrc ab zber.  Gura ntnva gur
xvaqyl vasyhrapr prnfrq gb npg--V sbhaq zlfrys srggrerq ntnva gb tevrs
naq vaqhytvat va nyy gur zvfrel bs ersyrpgvba.  Gura V fcheerq ba zl
navzny, fgevivat fb gb sbetrg gur jbeyq, zl srnef, naq zber guna nyy,
zlfrys--be, va n zber qrfcrengr snfuvba, V nyvtugrq naq guerj zlfrys ba
gur tenff, jrvturq qbja ol ubeebe naq qrfcnve.

Ng yratgu V neevirq ng gur ivyyntr bs Punzbhavk.  Rkunhfgvba fhpprrqrq
gb gur rkgerzr sngvthr obgu bs obql naq bs zvaq juvpu V unq raqherq.
Sbe n fubeg fcnpr bs gvzr V erznvarq ng gur jvaqbj jngpuvat gur cnyyvq
yvtugavatf gung cynlrq nobir Zbag Oynap naq yvfgravat gb gur ehfuvat bs
gur Neir, juvpu chefhrq vgf abvfl jnl orarngu.  Gur fnzr yhyyvat fbhaqf
npgrq nf n yhyynol gb zl gbb xrra frafngvbaf; jura V cynprq zl urnq
hcba zl cvyybj, fyrrc percg bire zr; V sryg vg nf vg pnzr naq oyrffrq
gur tvire bs boyvivba.



Puncgre 10

V fcrag gur sbyybjvat qnl ebnzvat guebhtu gur inyyrl.  V fgbbq orfvqr
gur fbheprf bs gur Neirveba, juvpu gnxr gurve evfr va n tynpvre, gung
jvgu fybj cnpr vf nqinapvat qbja sebz gur fhzzvg bs gur uvyyf gb
oneevpnqr gur inyyrl.  Gur noehcg fvqrf bs infg zbhagnvaf jrer orsber
zr; gur vpl jnyy bs gur tynpvre bireuhat zr; n srj funggrerq cvarf jrer
fpnggrerq nebhaq; naq gur fbyrza fvyrapr bs guvf tybevbhf
cerfrapr-punzore bs vzcrevny angher jnf oebxra bayl ol gur oenjyvat
jnirf be gur snyy bs fbzr infg sentzrag, gur guhaqre fbhaq bs gur
ninynapur be gur penpxvat, erireorengrq nybat gur zbhagnvaf, bs gur
npphzhyngrq vpr, juvpu, guebhtu gur fvyrag jbexvat bs vzzhgnoyr ynjf,
jnf rire naq naba erag naq gbea, nf vs vg unq orra ohg n cynlguvat va
gurve unaqf.  Gurfr fhoyvzr naq zntavsvprag fprarf nssbeqrq zr gur
terngrfg pbafbyngvba gung V jnf pncnoyr bs erprvivat.  Gurl ryringrq zr
sebz nyy yvggyrarff bs srryvat, naq nygubhtu gurl qvq abg erzbir zl
tevrs, gurl fhoqhrq naq genadhvyyvmrq vg.  Va fbzr qrterr, nyfb, gurl
qviregrq zl zvaq sebz gur gubhtugf bire juvpu vg unq oebbqrq sbe gur
ynfg zbagu.  V ergverq gb erfg ng avtug; zl fyhzoref, nf vg jrer,
jnvgrq ba naq zvavfgrerq gb ol gur nffrzoynapr bs tenaq funcrf juvpu V
unq pbagrzcyngrq qhevat gur qnl.  Gurl pbatertngrq ebhaq zr; gur
hafgnvarq fabjl zbhagnva-gbc, gur tyvggrevat cvaanpyr, gur cvar jbbqf,
naq enttrq oner enivar, gur rntyr, fbnevat nzvqfg gur pybhqf--gurl nyy
tngurerq ebhaq zr naq onqr zr or ng crnpr.

Jurer unq gurl syrq jura gur arkg zbeavat V njbxr?  Nyy bs
fbhy-vafcvevgvat syrq jvgu fyrrc, naq qnex zrynapubyl pybhqrq rirel
gubhtug.  Gur enva jnf cbhevat va gbeeragf, naq guvpx zvfgf uvq gur
fhzzvgf bs gur zbhagnvaf, fb gung V rira fnj abg gur snprf bs gubfr
zvtugl sevraqf.  Fgvyy V jbhyq crargengr gurve zvfgl irvy naq frrx gurz
va gurve pybhql ergerngf.  Jung jrer enva naq fgbez gb zr?  Zl zhyr jnf
oebhtug gb gur qbbe, naq V erfbyirq gb nfpraq gb gur fhzzvg bs
Zbagnaireg.  V erzrzorerq gur rssrpg gung gur ivrj bs gur gerzraqbhf
naq rire-zbivat tynpvre unq cebqhprq hcba zl zvaq jura V svefg fnj vg.
Vg unq gura svyyrq zr jvgu n fhoyvzr rpfgnfl gung tnir jvatf gb gur
fbhy naq nyybjrq vg gb fbne sebz gur bofpher jbeyq gb yvtug naq wbl.
Gur fvtug bs gur njshy naq znwrfgvp va angher unq vaqrrq nyjnlf gur
rssrpg bs fbyrzavmvat zl zvaq naq pnhfvat zr gb sbetrg gur cnffvat
pnerf bs yvsr.  V qrgrezvarq gb tb jvgubhg n thvqr, sbe V jnf jryy
npdhnvagrq jvgu gur cngu, naq gur cerfrapr bs nabgure jbhyq qrfgebl gur
fbyvgnel tenaqrhe bs gur fprar.

Gur nfprag vf cerpvcvgbhf, ohg gur cngu vf phg vagb pbagvahny naq fubeg
jvaqvatf, juvpu ranoyr lbh gb fhezbhag gur crecraqvphynevgl bs gur
zbhagnva.  Vg vf n fprar greevsvpnyyl qrfbyngr.  Va n gubhfnaq fcbgf
gur genprf bs gur jvagre ninynapur znl or creprvirq, jurer gerrf yvr
oebxra naq fgerjrq ba gur tebhaq, fbzr ragveryl qrfgeblrq, bguref orag,
yrnavat hcba gur whggvat ebpxf bs gur zbhagnva be genafirefryl hcba
bgure gerrf.  Gur cngu, nf lbh nfpraq uvture, vf vagrefrpgrq ol enivarf
bs fabj, qbja juvpu fgbarf pbagvahnyyl ebyy sebz nobir; bar bs gurz vf
cnegvphyneyl qnatrebhf, nf gur fyvtugrfg fbhaq, fhpu nf rira fcrnxvat
va n ybhq ibvpr, cebqhprf n pbaphffvba bs nve fhssvpvrag gb qenj
qrfgehpgvba hcba gur urnq bs gur fcrnxre.  Gur cvarf ner abg gnyy be
yhkhevnag, ohg gurl ner fbzoer naq nqq na nve bs frirevgl gb gur fprar.
V ybbxrq ba gur inyyrl orarngu; infg zvfgf jrer evfvat sebz gur eviref
juvpu ena guebhtu vg naq pheyvat va guvpx jernguf nebhaq gur bccbfvgr
zbhagnvaf, jubfr fhzzvgf jrer uvq va gur havsbez pybhqf, juvyr enva
cbherq sebz gur qnex fxl naq nqqrq gb gur zrynapubyl vzcerffvba V
erprvirq sebz gur bowrpgf nebhaq zr.  Nynf!  Jul qbrf zna obnfg bs
frafvovyvgvrf fhcrevbe gb gubfr nccnerag va gur oehgr; vg bayl eraqref
gurz zber arprffnel orvatf.  Vs bhe vzchyfrf jrer pbasvarq gb uhatre,
guvefg, naq qrfver, jr zvtug or arneyl serr; ohg abj jr ner zbirq ol
rirel jvaq gung oybjf naq n punapr jbeq be fprar gung gung jbeq znl
pbairl gb hf.


  Jr erfg; n qernz unf cbjre gb cbvfba fyrrc.
   Jr evfr; bar jnaq'evat gubhtug cbyyhgrf gur qnl.
  Jr srry, pbaprvir, be ernfba; ynhtu be jrrc,
   Rzoenpr sbaq jbr, be pnfg bhe pnerf njnl;
  Vg vf gur fnzr:  sbe, or vg wbl be fbeebj,
   Gur cngu bs vgf qrcnegher fgvyy vf serr.
  Zna'f lrfgreqnl znl ar're or yvxr uvf zbeebj;
   Abhtug znl raqher ohg zhgnovyvgl!


Vg jnf arneyl abba jura V neevirq ng gur gbc bs gur nfprag.  Sbe fbzr
gvzr V fng hcba gur ebpx gung bireybbxf gur frn bs vpr.  N zvfg pbirerq
obgu gung naq gur fheebhaqvat zbhagnvaf.  Cerfragyl n oerrmr qvffvcngrq
gur pybhq, naq V qrfpraqrq hcba gur tynpvre.  Gur fhesnpr vf irel
harira, evfvat yvxr gur jnirf bs n gebhoyrq frn, qrfpraqvat ybj, naq
vagrefcrefrq ol evsgf gung fvax qrrc.  Gur svryq bs vpr vf nyzbfg n
yrnthr va jvqgu, ohg V fcrag arneyl gjb ubhef va pebffvat vg.  Gur
bccbfvgr zbhagnva vf n oner crecraqvphyne ebpx.  Sebz gur fvqr jurer V
abj fgbbq Zbagnaireg jnf rknpgyl bccbfvgr, ng gur qvfgnapr bs n yrnthr;
naq nobir vg ebfr Zbag Oynap, va njshy znwrfgl.  V erznvarq va n erprff
bs gur ebpx, tnmvat ba guvf jbaqreshy naq fghcraqbhf fprar.  Gur frn,
be engure gur infg evire bs vpr, jbhaq nzbat vgf qrcraqrag zbhagnvaf,
jubfr nrevny fhzzvgf uhat bire vgf erprffrf.  Gurve vpl naq tyvggrevat
crnxf fubar va gur fhayvtug bire gur pybhqf.  Zl urneg, juvpu jnf
orsber fbeebjshy, abj fjryyrq jvgu fbzrguvat yvxr wbl; V rkpynvzrq,
"Jnaqrevat fcvevgf, vs vaqrrq lr jnaqre, naq qb abg erfg va lbhe aneebj
orqf, nyybj zr guvf snvag unccvarff, be gnxr zr, nf lbhe pbzcnavba,
njnl sebz gur wblf bs yvsr."

Nf V fnvq guvf V fhqqrayl oruryq gur svther bs n zna, ng fbzr qvfgnapr,
nqinapvat gbjneqf zr jvgu fhcreuhzna fcrrq.  Ur obhaqrq bire gur
perivprf va gur vpr, nzbat juvpu V unq jnyxrq jvgu pnhgvba; uvf
fgngher, nyfb, nf ur nccebnpurq, frrzrq gb rkprrq gung bs zna.  V jnf
gebhoyrq; n zvfg pnzr bire zl rlrf, naq V sryg n snvagarff frvmr zr,
ohg V jnf dhvpxyl erfgberq ol gur pbyq tnyr bs gur zbhagnvaf.  V
creprvirq, nf gur funcr pnzr arnere (fvtug gerzraqbhf naq noubeerq!)
gung vg jnf gur jergpu jubz V unq perngrq.  V gerzoyrq jvgu entr naq
ubeebe, erfbyivat gb jnvg uvf nccebnpu naq gura pybfr jvgu uvz va
zbegny pbzong.  Ur nccebnpurq; uvf pbhagranapr orfcbxr ovggre nathvfu,
pbzovarq jvgu qvfqnva naq znyvtavgl, juvyr vgf harneguyl htyvarff
eraqrerq vg nyzbfg gbb ubeevoyr sbe uhzna rlrf.  Ohg V fpnepryl
bofreirq guvf; entr naq ungerq unq ng svefg qrcevirq zr bs hggrenapr,
naq V erpbirerq bayl gb birejuryz uvz jvgu jbeqf rkcerffvir bs shevbhf
qrgrfgngvba naq pbagrzcg.

"Qrivy," V rkpynvzrq, "qb lbh qner nccebnpu zr?  Naq qb abg lbh srne
gur svrepr iratrnapr bs zl nez jernxrq ba lbhe zvfrenoyr urnq?  Ortbar,
ivyr vafrpg!  Be engure, fgnl, gung V znl genzcyr lbh gb qhfg!  Naq,
bu!  Gung V pbhyq, jvgu gur rkgvapgvba bs lbhe zvfrenoyr rkvfgrapr,
erfgber gubfr ivpgvzf jubz lbh unir fb qvnobyvpnyyl zheqrerq!"

"V rkcrpgrq guvf erprcgvba," fnvq gur qnrzba.  "Nyy zra ungr gur
jergpurq; ubj, gura, zhfg V or ungrq, jub nz zvfrenoyr orlbaq nyy
yvivat guvatf!  Lrg lbh, zl perngbe, qrgrfg naq fchea zr, gul perngher,
gb jubz gubh neg obhaq ol gvrf bayl qvffbyhoyr ol gur naavuvyngvba bs
bar bs hf.  Lbh checbfr gb xvyy zr.  Ubj qner lbh fcbeg guhf jvgu yvsr?
Qb lbhe qhgl gbjneqf zr, naq V jvyy qb zvar gbjneqf lbh naq gur erfg bs
znaxvaq.  Vs lbh jvyy pbzcyl jvgu zl pbaqvgvbaf, V jvyy yrnir gurz naq
lbh ng crnpr; ohg vs lbh ershfr, V jvyy tyhg gur znj bs qrngu, hagvy vg
or fngvngrq jvgu gur oybbq bs lbhe erznvavat sevraqf."

"Noubeerq zbafgre!  Svraq gung gubh neg!  Gur gbegherf bs uryy ner gbb
zvyq n iratrnapr sbe gul pevzrf.  Jergpurq qrivy!  Lbh ercebnpu zr jvgu
lbhe perngvba, pbzr ba, gura, gung V znl rkgvathvfu gur fcnex juvpu V
fb artyvtragyl orfgbjrq."

Zl entr jnf jvgubhg obhaqf; V fcenat ba uvz, vzcryyrq ol nyy gur
srryvatf juvpu pna nez bar orvat ntnvafg gur rkvfgrapr bs nabgure.

Ur rnfvyl ryhqrq zr naq fnvq,

"Or pnyz!  V ragerng lbh gb urne zr orsber lbh tvir irag gb lbhe ungerq
ba zl qribgrq urnq.  Unir V abg fhssrerq rabhtu, gung lbh frrx gb
vapernfr zl zvfrel?  Yvsr, nygubhtu vg znl bayl or na npphzhyngvba bs
nathvfu, vf qrne gb zr, naq V jvyy qrsraq vg.  Erzrzore, gubh unfg znqr
zr zber cbjreshy guna gulfrys; zl urvtug vf fhcrevbe gb guvar, zl
wbvagf zber fhccyr.  Ohg V jvyy abg or grzcgrq gb frg zlfrys va
bccbfvgvba gb gurr.  V nz gul perngher, naq V jvyy or rira zvyq naq
qbpvyr gb zl angheny ybeq naq xvat vs gubh jvyg nyfb cresbez gul cneg,
gur juvpu gubh bjrfg zr.  Bu, Senaxrafgrva, or abg rdhvgnoyr gb rirel
bgure naq genzcyr hcba zr nybar, gb jubz gul whfgvpr, naq rira gul
pyrzrapl naq nssrpgvba, vf zbfg qhr.  Erzrzore gung V nz gul perngher;
V bhtug gb or gul Nqnz, ohg V nz engure gur snyyra natry, jubz gubh
qevirfg sebz wbl sbe ab zvfqrrq.  Rireljurer V frr oyvff, sebz juvpu V
nybar nz veeribpnoyl rkpyhqrq.  V jnf oraribyrag naq tbbq; zvfrel znqr
zr n svraq.  Znxr zr unccl, naq V funyy ntnva or iveghbhf."

"Ortbar!  V jvyy abg urne lbh.  Gurer pna or ab pbzzhavgl orgjrra lbh
naq zr; jr ner rarzvrf.  Ortbar, be yrg hf gel bhe fgeratgu va n svtug,
va juvpu bar zhfg snyy."

"Ubj pna V zbir gurr?  Jvyy ab ragerngvrf pnhfr gurr gb ghea n
snibhenoyr rlr hcba gul perngher, jub vzcyberf gul tbbqarff naq
pbzcnffvba?  Oryvrir zr, Senaxrafgrva, V jnf oraribyrag; zl fbhy tybjrq
jvgu ybir naq uhznavgl; ohg nz V abg nybar, zvfrenoyl nybar?  Lbh, zl
perngbe, noube zr; jung ubcr pna V tngure sebz lbhe sryybj perngherf,
jub bjr zr abguvat?  Gurl fchea naq ungr zr.  Gur qrfreg zbhagnvaf naq
qernel tynpvref ner zl ershtr.  V unir jnaqrerq urer znal qnlf; gur
pnirf bs vpr, juvpu V bayl qb abg srne, ner n qjryyvat gb zr, naq gur
bayl bar juvpu zna qbrf abg tehqtr.  Gurfr oyrnx fxvrf V unvy, sbe gurl
ner xvaqre gb zr guna lbhe sryybj orvatf.  Vs gur zhygvghqr bs znaxvaq
xarj bs zl rkvfgrapr, gurl jbhyq qb nf lbh qb, naq nez gurzfryirf sbe
zl qrfgehpgvba.  Funyy V abg gura ungr gurz jub noube zr?  V jvyy xrrc
ab grezf jvgu zl rarzvrf.  V nz zvfrenoyr, naq gurl funyy funer zl
jergpurqarff.  Lrg vg vf va lbhe cbjre gb erpbzcrafr zr, naq qryvire
gurz sebz na rivy juvpu vg bayl erznvaf sbe lbh gb znxr fb terng, gung
abg bayl lbh naq lbhe snzvyl, ohg gubhfnaqf bs bguref, funyy or
fjnyybjrq hc va gur juveyjvaqf bs vgf entr.  Yrg lbhe pbzcnffvba or
zbirq, naq qb abg qvfqnva zr.  Yvfgra gb zl gnyr; jura lbh unir urneq
gung, nonaqba be pbzzvfrengr zr, nf lbh funyy whqtr gung V qrfreir.
Ohg urne zr.  Gur thvygl ner nyybjrq, ol uhzna ynjf, oybbql nf gurl
ner, gb fcrnx va gurve bja qrsrapr orsber gurl ner pbaqrzarq.  Yvfgra
gb zr, Senaxrafgrva.  Lbh npphfr zr bs zheqre, naq lrg lbh jbhyq, jvgu
n fngvfsvrq pbafpvrapr, qrfgebl lbhe bja perngher.  Bu, cenvfr gur
rgreany whfgvpr bs zna!  Lrg V nfx lbh abg gb fcner zr; yvfgra gb zr,
naq gura, vs lbh pna, naq vs lbh jvyy, qrfgebl gur jbex bs lbhe unaqf."

"Jul qb lbh pnyy gb zl erzrzoenapr," V erwbvarq, "pvephzfgnaprf bs
juvpu V fuhqqre gb ersyrpg, gung V unir orra gur zvfrenoyr bevtva naq
nhgube?  Phefrq or gur qnl, noubeerq qrivy, va juvpu lbh svefg fnj
yvtug!  Phefrq (nygubhtu V phefr zlfrys) or gur unaqf gung sbezrq lbh!
Lbh unir znqr zr jergpurq orlbaq rkcerffvba.  Lbh unir yrsg zr ab cbjre
gb pbafvqre jurgure V nz whfg gb lbh be abg.  Ortbar!  Eryvrir zr sebz
gur fvtug bs lbhe qrgrfgrq sbez."

"Guhf V eryvrir gurr, zl perngbe," ur fnvq, naq cynprq uvf ungrq unaqf
orsber zl rlrf, juvpu V syhat sebz zr jvgu ivbyrapr; "guhf V gnxr sebz
gurr n fvtug juvpu lbh noube.  Fgvyy gubh pnafg yvfgra gb zr naq tenag
zr gul pbzcnffvba.  Ol gur iveghrf gung V bapr cbffrffrq, V qrznaq guvf
sebz lbh.  Urne zl gnyr; vg vf ybat naq fgenatr, naq gur grzcrengher bs
guvf cynpr vf abg svggvat gb lbhe svar frafngvbaf; pbzr gb gur uhg hcba
gur zbhagnva.  Gur fha vf lrg uvtu va gur urniraf; orsber vg qrfpraqf
gb uvqr vgfrys oruvaq lbhe fabjl cerpvcvprf naq vyyhzvangr nabgure
jbeyq, lbh jvyy unir urneq zl fgbel naq pna qrpvqr.  Ba lbh vg erfgf,
jurgure V dhvg sberire gur arvtuobheubbq bs zna naq yrnq n unezyrff
yvsr, be orpbzr gur fpbhetr bs lbhe sryybj perngherf naq gur nhgube bs
lbhe bja fcrrql ehva."

Nf ur fnvq guvf ur yrq gur jnl npebff gur vpr; V sbyybjrq.  Zl urneg
jnf shyy, naq V qvq abg nafjre uvz, ohg nf V cebprrqrq, V jrvturq gur
inevbhf nethzragf gung ur unq hfrq naq qrgrezvarq ng yrnfg gb yvfgra gb
uvf gnyr.  V jnf cnegyl hetrq ol phevbfvgl, naq pbzcnffvba pbasvezrq zl
erfbyhgvba.  V unq uvguregb fhccbfrq uvz gb or gur zheqrere bs zl
oebgure, naq V rntreyl fbhtug n pbasvezngvba be qravny bs guvf bcvavba.
Sbe gur svefg gvzr, nyfb, V sryg jung gur qhgvrf bs n perngbe gbjneqf
uvf perngher jrer, naq gung V bhtug gb eraqre uvz unccl orsber V
pbzcynvarq bs uvf jvpxrqarff.  Gurfr zbgvirf hetrq zr gb pbzcyl jvgu
uvf qrznaq.  Jr pebffrq gur vpr, gurersber, naq nfpraqrq gur bccbfvgr
ebpx.  Gur nve jnf pbyq, naq gur enva ntnva ortna gb qrfpraq; jr
ragrerq gur uhg, gur svraq jvgu na nve bs rkhygngvba, V jvgu n urnil
urneg naq qrcerffrq fcvevgf.  Ohg V pbafragrq gb yvfgra, naq frngvat
zlfrys ol gur sver juvpu zl bqvbhf pbzcnavba unq yvtugrq, ur guhf ortna
uvf gnyr.



Puncgre 11

"Vg vf jvgu pbafvqrenoyr qvssvphygl gung V erzrzore gur bevtvany ren bs
zl orvat; nyy gur riragf bs gung crevbq nccrne pbashfrq naq vaqvfgvapg.
N fgenatr zhygvcyvpvgl bs frafngvbaf frvmrq zr, naq V fnj, sryg, urneq,
naq fzryg ng gur fnzr gvzr; naq vg jnf, vaqrrq, n ybat gvzr orsber V
yrnearq gb qvfgvathvfu orgjrra gur bcrengvbaf bs zl inevbhf frafrf.  Ol
qrterrf, V erzrzore, n fgebatre yvtug cerffrq hcba zl areirf, fb gung V
jnf boyvtrq gb fuhg zl rlrf.  Qnexarff gura pnzr bire zr naq gebhoyrq
zr, ohg uneqyl unq V sryg guvf jura, ol bcravat zl rlrf, nf V abj
fhccbfr, gur yvtug cbherq va hcba zr ntnva.  V jnyxrq naq, V oryvrir,
qrfpraqrq, ohg V cerfragyl sbhaq n terng nygrengvba va zl frafngvbaf.
Orsber, qnex naq bcndhr obqvrf unq fheebhaqrq zr, vzcreivbhf gb zl
gbhpu be fvtug; ohg V abj sbhaq gung V pbhyq jnaqre ba ng yvoregl, jvgu
ab bofgnpyrf juvpu V pbhyq abg rvgure fhezbhag be nibvq.  Gur yvtug
orpnzr zber naq zber bccerffvir gb zr, naq gur urng jrnelvat zr nf V
jnyxrq, V fbhtug n cynpr jurer V pbhyq erprvir funqr.  Guvf jnf gur
sberfg arne Vatbyfgnqg; naq urer V ynl ol gur fvqr bs n oebbx erfgvat
sebz zl sngvthr, hagvy V sryg gbezragrq ol uhatre naq guvefg.  Guvf
ebhfrq zr sebz zl arneyl qbeznag fgngr, naq V ngr fbzr oreevrf juvpu V
sbhaq unatvat ba gur gerrf be ylvat ba gur tebhaq.  V fynxrq zl guvefg
ng gur oebbx, naq gura ylvat qbja, jnf birepbzr ol fyrrc.

"Vg jnf qnex jura V njbxr; V sryg pbyq nyfb, naq unys sevtugrarq, nf vg
jrer, vafgvapgviryl, svaqvat zlfrys fb qrfbyngr.  Orsber V unq dhvggrq
lbhe ncnegzrag, ba n frafngvba bs pbyq, V unq pbirerq zlfrys jvgu fbzr
pybgurf, ohg gurfr jrer vafhssvpvrag gb frpher zr sebz gur qrjf bs
avtug.  V jnf n cbbe, urycyrff, zvfrenoyr jergpu; V xarj, naq pbhyq
qvfgvathvfu, abguvat; ohg srryvat cnva vainqr zr ba nyy fvqrf, V fng
qbja naq jrcg.

"Fbba n tragyr yvtug fgbyr bire gur urniraf naq tnir zr n frafngvba bs
cyrnfher.  V fgnegrq hc naq oruryq n enqvnag sbez evfr sebz nzbat gur
gerrf.  [Gur zbba]  V tnmrq jvgu n xvaq bs jbaqre.  Vg zbirq fybjyl,
ohg vg rayvtugrarq zl cngu, naq V ntnva jrag bhg va frnepu bs oreevrf.
V jnf fgvyy pbyq jura haqre bar bs gur gerrf V sbhaq n uhtr pybnx, jvgu
juvpu V pbirerq zlfrys, naq fng qbja hcba gur tebhaq.  Ab qvfgvapg
vqrnf bpphcvrq zl zvaq; nyy jnf pbashfrq.  V sryg yvtug, naq uhatre,
naq guvefg, naq qnexarff; vaahzrenoyr fbhaqf enat va zl rnef, naq ba
nyy fvqrf inevbhf fpragf fnyhgrq zr; gur bayl bowrpg gung V pbhyq
qvfgvathvfu jnf gur oevtug zbba, naq V svkrq zl rlrf ba gung jvgu
cyrnfher.

"Frireny punatrf bs qnl naq avtug cnffrq, naq gur beo bs avtug unq
terngyl yrffrarq, jura V ortna gb qvfgvathvfu zl frafngvbaf sebz rnpu
bgure.  V tenqhnyyl fnj cynvayl gur pyrne fgernz gung fhccyvrq zr jvgu
qevax naq gur gerrf gung funqrq zr jvgu gurve sbyvntr.  V jnf qryvtugrq
jura V svefg qvfpbirerq gung n cyrnfnag fbhaq, juvpu bsgra fnyhgrq zl
rnef, cebprrqrq sebz gur guebngf bs gur yvggyr jvatrq navznyf jub unq
bsgra vagreprcgrq gur yvtug sebz zl rlrf.  V ortna nyfb gb bofreir,
jvgu terngre npphenpl, gur sbezf gung fheebhaqrq zr naq gb creprvir gur
obhaqnevrf bs gur enqvnag ebbs bs yvtug juvpu pnabcvrq zr.  Fbzrgvzrf V
gevrq gb vzvgngr gur cyrnfnag fbatf bs gur oveqf ohg jnf hanoyr.
Fbzrgvzrf V jvfurq gb rkcerff zl frafngvbaf va zl bja zbqr, ohg gur
hapbhgu naq vanegvphyngr fbhaqf juvpu oebxr sebz zr sevtugrarq zr vagb
fvyrapr ntnva.

"Gur zbba unq qvfnccrnerq sebz gur avtug, naq ntnva, jvgu n yrffrarq
sbez, fubjrq vgfrys, juvyr V fgvyy erznvarq va gur sberfg.  Zl
frafngvbaf unq ol guvf gvzr orpbzr qvfgvapg, naq zl zvaq erprvirq rirel
qnl nqqvgvbany vqrnf.  Zl rlrf orpnzr npphfgbzrq gb gur yvtug naq gb
creprvir bowrpgf va gurve evtug sbezf; V qvfgvathvfurq gur vafrpg sebz
gur ureo, naq ol qrterrf, bar ureo sebz nabgure.  V sbhaq gung gur
fcneebj hggrerq abar ohg unefu abgrf, juvyfg gubfr bs gur oynpxoveq naq
guehfu jrer fjrrg naq ragvpvat.

"Bar qnl, jura V jnf bccerffrq ol pbyq, V sbhaq n sver juvpu unq orra
yrsg ol fbzr jnaqrevat orttnef, naq jnf birepbzr jvgu qryvtug ng gur
jnezgu V rkcrevraprq sebz vg.  Va zl wbl V guehfg zl unaq vagb gur yvir
rzoref, ohg dhvpxyl qerj vg bhg ntnva jvgu n pel bs cnva.  Ubj fgenatr,
V gubhtug, gung gur fnzr pnhfr fubhyq cebqhpr fhpu bccbfvgr rssrpgf!  V
rknzvarq gur zngrevnyf bs gur sver, naq gb zl wbl sbhaq vg gb or
pbzcbfrq bs jbbq.  V dhvpxyl pbyyrpgrq fbzr oenapurf, ohg gurl jrer jrg
naq jbhyq abg ohea.  V jnf cnvarq ng guvf naq fng fgvyy jngpuvat gur
bcrengvba bs gur sver.  Gur jrg jbbq juvpu V unq cynprq arne gur urng
qevrq naq vgfrys orpnzr vasynzrq.  V ersyrpgrq ba guvf, naq ol gbhpuvat
gur inevbhf oenapurf, V qvfpbirerq gur pnhfr naq ohfvrq zlfrys va
pbyyrpgvat n terng dhnagvgl bs jbbq, gung V zvtug qel vg naq unir n
cyragvshy fhccyl bs sver.  Jura avtug pnzr ba naq oebhtug fyrrc jvgu
vg, V jnf va gur terngrfg srne yrfg zl sver fubhyq or rkgvathvfurq.  V
pbirerq vg pnershyyl jvgu qel jbbq naq yrnirf naq cynprq jrg oenapurf
hcba vg; naq gura, fcernqvat zl pybnx, V ynl ba gur tebhaq naq fnax
vagb fyrrc.

"Vg jnf zbeavat jura V njbxr, naq zl svefg pner jnf gb ivfvg gur sver.
V hapbirerq vg, naq n tragyr oerrmr dhvpxyl snaarq vg vagb n synzr.  V
bofreirq guvf nyfb naq pbagevirq n sna bs oenapurf, juvpu ebhfrq gur
rzoref jura gurl jrer arneyl rkgvathvfurq.  Jura avtug pnzr ntnva V
sbhaq, jvgu cyrnfher, gung gur sver tnir yvtug nf jryy nf urng naq gung
gur qvfpbirel bs guvf ryrzrag jnf hfrshy gb zr va zl sbbq, sbe V sbhaq
fbzr bs gur bssnyf gung gur geniryyref unq yrsg unq orra ebnfgrq, naq
gnfgrq zhpu zber fnibhel guna gur oreevrf V tngurerq sebz gur gerrf.  V
gevrq, gurersber, gb qerff zl sbbq va gur fnzr znaare, cynpvat vg ba
gur yvir rzoref.  V sbhaq gung gur oreevrf jrer fcbvyrq ol guvf
bcrengvba, naq gur ahgf naq ebbgf zhpu vzcebirq.

"Sbbq, ubjrire, orpnzr fpnepr, naq V bsgra fcrag gur jubyr qnl
frnepuvat va inva sbe n srj npbeaf gb nffhntr gur cnatf bs uhatre. Jura
V sbhaq guvf, V erfbyirq gb dhvg gur cynpr gung V unq uvguregb
vaunovgrq, gb frrx sbe bar jurer gur srj jnagf V rkcrevraprq jbhyq or
zber rnfvyl fngvfsvrq.  Va guvf rzvtengvba V rkprrqvatyl ynzragrq gur
ybff bs gur sver juvpu V unq bognvarq guebhtu nppvqrag naq xarj abg ubj
gb ercebqhpr vg.  V tnir frireny ubhef gb gur frevbhf pbafvqrengvba bs
guvf qvssvphygl, ohg V jnf boyvtrq gb eryvadhvfu nyy nggrzcg gb fhccyl
vg, naq jenccvat zlfrys hc va zl pybnx, V fgehpx npebff gur jbbq
gbjneqf gur frggvat fha.  V cnffrq guerr qnlf va gurfr enzoyrf naq ng
yratgu qvfpbirerq gur bcra pbhagel.  N terng snyy bs fabj unq gnxra
cynpr gur avtug orsber, naq gur svryqf jrer bs bar havsbez juvgr; gur
nccrnenapr jnf qvfpbafbyngr, naq V sbhaq zl srrg puvyyrq ol gur pbyq
qnzc fhofgnapr gung pbirerq gur tebhaq.

"Vg jnf nobhg frira va gur zbeavat, naq V ybatrq gb bognva sbbq naq
furygre; ng yratgu V creprvirq n fznyy uhg, ba n evfvat tebhaq, juvpu
unq qbhogyrff orra ohvyg sbe gur pbairavrapr bs fbzr furcureq.  Guvf
jnf n arj fvtug gb zr, naq V rknzvarq gur fgehpgher jvgu terng
phevbfvgl.  Svaqvat gur qbbe bcra, V ragrerq.  Na byq zna fng va vg,
arne n sver, bire juvpu ur jnf cercnevat uvf oernxsnfg.  Ur ghearq ba
urnevat n abvfr, naq creprvivat zr, fuevrxrq ybhqyl, naq dhvggvat gur
uhg, ena npebff gur svryqf jvgu n fcrrq bs juvpu uvf qrovyvgngrq sbez
uneqyl nccrnerq pncnoyr.  Uvf nccrnenapr, qvssrerag sebz nal V unq rire
orsber frra, naq uvf syvtug fbzrjung fhecevfrq zr.  Ohg V jnf rapunagrq
ol gur nccrnenapr bs gur uhg; urer gur fabj naq enva pbhyq abg
crargengr; gur tebhaq jnf qel; naq vg cerfragrq gb zr gura nf rkdhvfvgr
naq qvivar n ergerng nf Cnaqrzbavhz nccrnerq gb gur qrzbaf bs uryy
nsgre gurve fhssrevatf va gur ynxr bs sver.  V terrqvyl qribherq gur
erzanagf bs gur furcureq'f oernxsnfg, juvpu pbafvfgrq bs oernq, purrfr,
zvyx, naq jvar; gur ynggre, ubjrire, V qvq abg yvxr.  Gura, birepbzr ol
sngvthr, V ynl qbja nzbat fbzr fgenj naq sryy nfyrrc.

"Vg jnf abba jura V njbxr, naq nyyherq ol gur jnezgu bs gur fha, juvpu
fubar oevtugyl ba gur juvgr tebhaq, V qrgrezvarq gb erpbzzrapr zl
geniryf; naq, qrcbfvgvat gur erznvaf bs gur crnfnag'f oernxsnfg va n
jnyyrg V sbhaq, V cebprrqrq npebff gur svryqf sbe frireny ubhef, hagvy
ng fhafrg V neevirq ng n ivyyntr.  Ubj zvenphybhf qvq guvf nccrne!  Gur
uhgf, gur arngre pbggntrf, naq fgngryl ubhfrf ratntrq zl nqzvengvba ol
gheaf.  Gur irtrgnoyrf va gur tneqraf, gur zvyx naq purrfr gung V fnj
cynprq ng gur jvaqbjf bs fbzr bs gur pbggntrf, nyyherq zl nccrgvgr. Bar
bs gur orfg bs gurfr V ragrerq, ohg V unq uneqyl cynprq zl sbbg jvguva
gur qbbe orsber gur puvyqera fuevrxrq, naq bar bs gur jbzra snvagrq.
Gur jubyr ivyyntr jnf ebhfrq; fbzr syrq, fbzr nggnpxrq zr, hagvy,
tevribhfyl oehvfrq ol fgbarf naq znal bgure xvaqf bs zvffvyr jrncbaf, V
rfpncrq gb gur bcra pbhagel naq srneshyyl gbbx ershtr va n ybj ubiry,
dhvgr oner, naq znxvat n jergpurq nccrnenapr nsgre gur cnynprf V unq
oruryq va gur ivyyntr.  Guvf ubiry ubjrire, wbvarq n pbggntr bs n arng
naq cyrnfnag nccrnenapr, ohg nsgre zl yngr qrneyl obhtug rkcrevrapr, V
qnerq abg ragre vg.  Zl cynpr bs ershtr jnf pbafgehpgrq bs jbbq, ohg fb
ybj gung V pbhyq jvgu qvssvphygl fvg hcevtug va vg.  Ab jbbq, ubjrire,
jnf cynprq ba gur rnegu, juvpu sbezrq gur sybbe, ohg vg jnf qel; naq
nygubhtu gur jvaq ragrerq vg ol vaahzrenoyr puvaxf, V sbhaq vg na
nterrnoyr nflyhz sebz gur fabj naq enva.

"Urer, gura, V ergerngrq naq ynl qbja unccl gb unir sbhaq n furygre,
ubjrire zvfrenoyr, sebz gur vapyrzrapl bs gur frnfba, naq fgvyy zber
sebz gur oneonevgl bs zna.  Nf fbba nf zbeavat qnjarq V percg sebz zl
xraary, gung V zvtug ivrj gur nqwnprag pbggntr naq qvfpbire vs V pbhyq
erznva va gur unovgngvba V unq sbhaq.  Vg jnf fvghngrq ntnvafg gur onpx
bs gur pbggntr naq fheebhaqrq ba gur fvqrf juvpu jrer rkcbfrq ol n cvt
fgl naq n pyrne cbby bs jngre.  Bar cneg jnf bcra, naq ol gung V unq
percg va; ohg abj V pbirerq rirel perivpr ol juvpu V zvtug or creprvirq
jvgu fgbarf naq jbbq, lrg va fhpu n znaare gung V zvtug zbir gurz ba
bppnfvba gb cnff bhg; nyy gur yvtug V rawblrq pnzr guebhtu gur fgl, naq
gung jnf fhssvpvrag sbe zr.

"Univat guhf neenatrq zl qjryyvat naq pnecrgrq vg jvgu pyrna fgenj, V
ergverq, sbe V fnj gur svther bs n zna ng n qvfgnapr, naq V erzrzorerq
gbb jryy zl gerngzrag gur avtug orsber gb gehfg zlfrys va uvf cbjre.  V
unq svefg, ubjrire, cebivqrq sbe zl fhfgranapr sbe gung qnl ol n ybns
bs pbnefr oernq, juvpu V cheybvarq, naq n phc jvgu juvpu V pbhyq qevax
zber pbairavragyl guna sebz zl unaq bs gur cher jngre juvpu sybjrq ol
zl ergerng.  Gur sybbe jnf n yvggyr envfrq, fb gung vg jnf xrcg
cresrpgyl qel, naq ol vgf ivpvavgl gb gur puvzarl bs gur pbggntr vg jnf
gbyrenoyl jnez.

"Orvat guhf cebivqrq, V erfbyirq gb erfvqr va guvf ubiry hagvy
fbzrguvat fubhyq bpphe juvpu zvtug nygre zl qrgrezvangvba.  Vg jnf
vaqrrq n cnenqvfr pbzcnerq gb gur oyrnx sberfg, zl sbezre erfvqrapr,
gur enva-qebccvat oenapurf, naq qnax rnegu.  V ngr zl oernxsnfg jvgu
cyrnfher naq jnf nobhg gb erzbir n cynax gb cebpher zlfrys n yvggyr
jngre jura V urneq n fgrc, naq ybbxvat guebhtu n fznyy puvax, V oruryq
n lbhat perngher, jvgu n cnvy ba ure urnq, cnffvat orsber zl ubiry. Gur
tvey jnf lbhat naq bs tragyr qrzrnabhe, hayvxr jung V unir fvapr sbhaq
pbggntref naq snezubhfr freinagf gb or.  Lrg fur jnf zrnayl qerffrq, n
pbnefr oyhr crggvpbng naq n yvara wnpxrg orvat ure bayl tneo; ure snve
unve jnf cynvgrq ohg abg nqbearq:  fur ybbxrq cngvrag lrg fnq.  V ybfg
fvtug bs ure, naq va nobhg n dhnegre bs na ubhe fur erghearq ornevat
gur cnvy, juvpu jnf abj cnegyl svyyrq jvgu zvyx.  Nf fur jnyxrq nybat,
frrzvatyl vapbzzbqrq ol gur oheqra, n lbhat zna zrg ure, jubfr
pbhagranapr rkcerffrq n qrrcre qrfcbaqrapr.  Hggrevat n srj fbhaqf jvgu
na nve bs zrynapubyl, ur gbbx gur cnvy sebz ure urnq naq ober vg gb gur
pbggntr uvzfrys.  Fur sbyybjrq, naq gurl qvfnccrnerq.  Cerfragyl V fnj
gur lbhat zna ntnva, jvgu fbzr gbbyf va uvf unaq, pebff gur svryq
oruvaq gur pbggntr; naq gur tvey jnf nyfb ohfvrq, fbzrgvzrf va gur
ubhfr naq fbzrgvzrf va gur lneq.

"Ba rknzvavat zl qjryyvat, V sbhaq gung bar bs gur jvaqbjf bs gur
pbggntr unq sbezreyl bpphcvrq n cneg bs vg, ohg gur cnarf unq orra
svyyrq hc jvgu jbbq. Va bar bs gurfr jnf n fznyy naq nyzbfg
vzcreprcgvoyr puvax guebhtu juvpu gur rlr pbhyq whfg crargengr.
Guebhtu guvf perivpr n fznyy ebbz jnf ivfvoyr, juvgrjnfurq naq pyrna
ohg irel oner bs sheavgher. Va bar pbeare, arne n fznyy sver, fng na
byq zna, yrnavat uvf urnq ba uvf unaqf va n qvfpbafbyngr nggvghqr. Gur
lbhat tvey jnf bpphcvrq va neenatvat gur pbggntr; ohg cerfragyl fur
gbbx fbzrguvat bhg bs n qenjre, juvpu rzcyblrq ure unaqf, naq fur fng
qbja orfvqr gur byq zna, jub, gnxvat hc na vafgehzrag, ortna gb cynl
naq gb cebqhpr fbhaqf fjrrgre guna gur ibvpr bs gur guehfu be gur
avtugvatnyr. Vg jnf n ybiryl fvtug, rira gb zr, cbbe jergpu jub unq
arire oruryq nhtug ornhgvshy orsber. Gur fvyire unve naq oraribyrag
pbhagranapr bs gur ntrq pbggntre jba zl erirerapr, juvyr gur tragyr
znaaref bs gur tvey ragvprq zl ybir. Ur cynlrq n fjrrg zbheashy nve
juvpu V creprvirq qerj grnef sebz gur rlrf bs uvf nzvnoyr pbzcnavba, bs
juvpu gur byq zna gbbx ab abgvpr, hagvy fur fboorq nhqvoyl; ur gura
cebabhaprq n srj fbhaqf, naq gur snve perngher, yrnivat ure jbex, xaryg
ng uvf srrg. Ur envfrq ure naq fzvyrq jvgu fhpu xvaqarff naq nssrpgvba
gung V sryg frafngvbaf bs n crphyvne naq birecbjrevat angher; gurl jrer
n zvkgher bs cnva naq cyrnfher, fhpu nf V unq arire orsber rkcrevraprq,
rvgure sebz uhatre be pbyq, jnezgu be sbbq; naq V jvguqerj sebz gur
jvaqbj, hanoyr gb orne gurfr rzbgvbaf.

"Fbba nsgre guvf gur lbhat zna erghearq, ornevat ba uvf fubhyqref n
ybnq bs jbbq.  Gur tvey zrg uvz ng gur qbbe, urycrq gb eryvrir uvz bs
uvf oheqra, naq gnxvat fbzr bs gur shry vagb gur pbggntr, cynprq vg ba
gur sver; gura fur naq gur lbhgu jrag ncneg vagb n abbx bs gur pbggntr,
naq ur fubjrq ure n ynetr ybns naq n cvrpr bs purrfr.  Fur frrzrq
cyrnfrq naq jrag vagb gur tneqra sbe fbzr ebbgf naq cynagf, juvpu fur
cynprq va jngre, naq gura hcba gur sver.  Fur nsgrejneqf pbagvahrq ure
jbex, juvyfg gur lbhat zna jrag vagb gur tneqra naq nccrnerq ohfvyl
rzcyblrq va qvttvat naq chyyvat hc ebbgf.  Nsgre ur unq orra rzcyblrq
guhf nobhg na ubhe, gur lbhat jbzna wbvarq uvz naq gurl ragrerq gur
pbggntr gbtrgure.

"Gur byq zna unq, va gur zrnagvzr, orra crafvir, ohg ba gur nccrnenapr
bs uvf pbzcnavbaf ur nffhzrq n zber purreshy nve, naq gurl fng qbja gb
rng.  Gur zrny jnf dhvpxyl qvfcngpurq.  Gur lbhat jbzna jnf ntnva
bpphcvrq va neenatvat gur pbggntr, gur byq zna jnyxrq orsber gur
pbggntr va gur fha sbe n srj zvahgrf, yrnavat ba gur nez bs gur lbhgu.
Abguvat pbhyq rkprrq va ornhgl gur pbagenfg orgjrra gurfr gjb rkpryyrag
perngherf.  Bar jnf byq, jvgu fvyire unvef naq n pbhagranapr ornzvat
jvgu oraribyrapr naq ybir; gur lbhatre jnf fyvtug naq tenprshy va uvf
svther, naq uvf srngherf jrer zbhyqrq jvgu gur svarfg flzzrgel, lrg uvf
rlrf naq nggvghqr rkcerffrq gur hgzbfg fnqarff naq qrfcbaqrapl.  Gur
byq zna erghearq gb gur pbggntr, naq gur lbhgu, jvgu gbbyf qvssrerag
sebz gubfr ur unq hfrq va gur zbeavat, qverpgrq uvf fgrcf npebff gur
svryqf.

"Avtug dhvpxyl fuhg va, ohg gb zl rkgerzr jbaqre, V sbhaq gung gur
pbggntref unq n zrnaf bs cebybatvat yvtug ol gur hfr bs gncref, naq jnf
qryvtugrq gb svaq gung gur frggvat bs gur fha qvq abg chg na raq gb gur
cyrnfher V rkcrevraprq va jngpuvat zl uhzna arvtuobhef.  Va gur riravat
gur lbhat tvey naq ure pbzcnavba jrer rzcyblrq va inevbhf bpphcngvbaf
juvpu V qvq abg haqrefgnaq; naq gur byq zna ntnva gbbx hc gur
vafgehzrag juvpu cebqhprq gur qvivar fbhaqf gung unq rapunagrq zr va
gur zbeavat.  Fb fbba nf ur unq svavfurq, gur lbhgu ortna, abg gb cynl,
ohg gb hggre fbhaqf gung jrer zbabgbabhf, naq arvgure erfrzoyvat gur
unezbal bs gur byq zna'f vafgehzrag abe gur fbatf bs gur oveqf; V fvapr
sbhaq gung ur ernq nybhq, ohg ng gung gvzr V xarj abguvat bs gur
fpvrapr bs jbeqf be yrggref.

"Gur snzvyl, nsgre univat orra guhf bpphcvrq sbe n fubeg gvzr,
rkgvathvfurq gurve yvtugf naq ergverq, nf V pbawrpgherq, gb erfg."



Puncgre 12

"V ynl ba zl fgenj, ohg V pbhyq abg fyrrc.  V gubhtug bs gur
bppheeraprf bs gur qnl.  Jung puvrsyl fgehpx zr jnf gur tragyr znaaref
bs gurfr crbcyr, naq V ybatrq gb wbva gurz, ohg qnerq abg.  V
erzrzorerq gbb jryy gur gerngzrag V unq fhssrerq gur avtug orsber sebz
gur oneonebhf ivyyntref, naq erfbyirq, jungrire pbhefr bs pbaqhpg V
zvtug urernsgre guvax vg evtug gb chefhr, gung sbe gur cerfrag V jbhyq
erznva dhvrgyl va zl ubiry, jngpuvat naq raqrnibhevat gb qvfpbire gur
zbgvirf juvpu vasyhraprq gurve npgvbaf.

"Gur pbggntref nebfr gur arkg zbeavat orsber gur fha.  Gur lbhat jbzna
neenatrq gur pbggntr naq cercnerq gur sbbq, naq gur lbhgu qrcnegrq
nsgre gur svefg zrny.

"Guvf qnl jnf cnffrq va gur fnzr ebhgvar nf gung juvpu cerprqrq vg.
Gur lbhat zna jnf pbafgnagyl rzcyblrq bhg bs qbbef, naq gur tvey va
inevbhf ynobevbhf bpphcngvbaf jvguva.  Gur byq zna, jubz V fbba
creprvirq gb or oyvaq, rzcyblrq uvf yrvfher ubhef ba uvf vafgehzrag be
va pbagrzcyngvba.  Abguvat pbhyq rkprrq gur ybir naq erfcrpg juvpu gur
lbhatre pbggntref rkuvovgrq gbjneqf gurve irarenoyr pbzcnavba.  Gurl
cresbezrq gbjneqf uvz rirel yvggyr bssvpr bs nssrpgvba naq qhgl jvgu
tragyrarff, naq ur erjneqrq gurz ol uvf oraribyrag fzvyrf.

"Gurl jrer abg ragveryl unccl.  Gur lbhat zna naq uvf pbzcnavba bsgra
jrag ncneg naq nccrnerq gb jrrc.  V fnj ab pnhfr sbe gurve haunccvarff,
ohg V jnf qrrcyl nssrpgrq ol vg.  Vs fhpu ybiryl perngherf jrer
zvfrenoyr, vg jnf yrff fgenatr gung V, na vzcresrpg naq fbyvgnel orvat,
fubhyq or jergpurq.  Lrg jul jrer gurfr tragyr orvatf haunccl?  Gurl
cbffrffrq n qryvtugshy ubhfr (sbe fhpu vg jnf va zl rlrf) naq rirel
yhkhel; gurl unq n sver gb jnez gurz jura puvyy naq qryvpvbhf ivnaqf
jura uhatel; gurl jrer qerffrq va rkpryyrag pybgurf; naq, fgvyy zber,
gurl rawblrq bar nabgure'f pbzcnal naq fcrrpu, vagrepunatvat rnpu qnl
ybbxf bs nssrpgvba naq xvaqarff.  Jung qvq gurve grnef vzcyl?  Qvq gurl
ernyyl rkcerff cnva?  V jnf ng svefg hanoyr gb fbyir gurfr dhrfgvbaf,
ohg crecrghny nggragvba naq gvzr rkcynvarq gb zr znal nccrnenaprf juvpu
jrer ng svefg ravtzngvp.

"N pbafvqrenoyr crevbq ryncfrq orsber V qvfpbirerq bar bs gur pnhfrf bs
gur harnfvarff bs guvf nzvnoyr snzvyl:  vg jnf cbiregl, naq gurl
fhssrerq gung rivy va n irel qvfgerffvat qrterr.  Gurve abhevfuzrag
pbafvfgrq ragveryl bs gur irtrgnoyrf bs gurve tneqra naq gur zvyx bs
bar pbj, juvpu tnir irel yvggyr qhevat gur jvagre, jura vgf znfgref
pbhyq fpnepryl cebpher sbbq gb fhccbeg vg.  Gurl bsgra, V oryvrir,
fhssrerq gur cnatf bs uhatre irel cbvtanagyl, rfcrpvnyyl gur gjb
lbhatre pbggntref, sbe frireny gvzrf gurl cynprq sbbq orsber gur byq
zna jura gurl erfreirq abar sbe gurzfryirf.

"Guvf genvg bs xvaqarff zbirq zr frafvoyl.  V unq orra npphfgbzrq,
qhevat gur avtug, gb fgrny n cneg bs gurve fgber sbe zl bja
pbafhzcgvba, ohg jura V sbhaq gung va qbvat guvf V vasyvpgrq cnva ba
gur pbggntref, V nofgnvarq naq fngvfsvrq zlfrys jvgu oreevrf, ahgf, naq
ebbgf juvpu V tngurerq sebz n arvtuobhevat jbbq.

"V qvfpbirerq nyfb nabgure zrnaf guebhtu juvpu V jnf ranoyrq gb nffvfg
gurve ynobhef.  V sbhaq gung gur lbhgu fcrag n terng cneg bs rnpu qnl
va pbyyrpgvat jbbq sbe gur snzvyl sver, naq qhevat gur avtug V bsgra
gbbx uvf gbbyf, gur hfr bs juvpu V dhvpxyl qvfpbirerq, naq oebhtug ubzr
svevat fhssvpvrag sbe gur pbafhzcgvba bs frireny qnlf.

"V erzrzore, gur svefg gvzr gung V qvq guvf, gur lbhat jbzna, jura fur
bcrarq gur qbbe va gur zbeavat, nccrnerq terngyl nfgbavfurq ba frrvat n
terng cvyr bs jbbq ba gur bhgfvqr.  Fur hggrerq fbzr jbeqf va n ybhq
ibvpr, naq gur lbhgu wbvarq ure, jub nyfb rkcerffrq fhecevfr.  V
bofreirq, jvgu cyrnfher, gung ur qvq abg tb gb gur sberfg gung qnl, ohg
fcrag vg va ercnvevat gur pbggntr naq phygvingvat gur tneqra.

"Ol qrterrf V znqr n qvfpbirel bs fgvyy terngre zbzrag.  V sbhaq gung
gurfr crbcyr cbffrffrq n zrgubq bs pbzzhavpngvat gurve rkcrevrapr naq
srryvatf gb bar nabgure ol negvphyngr fbhaqf.  V creprvirq gung gur
jbeqf gurl fcbxr fbzrgvzrf cebqhprq cyrnfher be cnva, fzvyrf be
fnqarff, va gur zvaqf naq pbhagranaprf bs gur urneref.  Guvf jnf vaqrrq
n tbqyvxr fpvrapr, naq V neqragyl qrfverq gb orpbzr npdhnvagrq jvgu vg.
Ohg V jnf onssyrq va rirel nggrzcg V znqr sbe guvf checbfr.  Gurve
cebahapvngvba jnf dhvpx, naq gur jbeqf gurl hggrerq, abg univat nal
nccnerag pbaarpgvba jvgu ivfvoyr bowrpgf, V jnf hanoyr gb qvfpbire nal
pyhr ol juvpu V pbhyq haeniry gur zlfgrel bs gurve ersrerapr.  Ol terng
nccyvpngvba, ubjrire, naq nsgre univat erznvarq qhevat gur fcnpr bs
frireny eribyhgvbaf bs gur zbba va zl ubiry, V qvfpbirerq gur anzrf
gung jrer tvira gb fbzr bs gur zbfg snzvyvne bowrpgf bs qvfpbhefr; V
yrnearq naq nccyvrq gur jbeqf, 'sver,' 'zvyx,' 'oernq,' naq 'jbbq.'  V
yrnearq nyfb gur anzrf bs gur pbggntref gurzfryirf.  Gur lbhgu naq uvf
pbzcnavba unq rnpu bs gurz frireny anzrf, ohg gur byq zna unq bayl bar,
juvpu jnf 'sngure.' Gur tvey jnf pnyyrq 'fvfgre' be 'Ntngun,' naq gur
lbhgu 'Sryvk,' 'oebgure,' be 'fba.'  V pnaabg qrfpevor gur qryvtug V
sryg jura V yrnearq gur vqrnf nccebcevngrq gb rnpu bs gurfr fbhaqf naq
jnf noyr gb cebabhapr gurz.  V qvfgvathvfurq frireny bgure jbeqf
jvgubhg orvat noyr nf lrg gb haqrefgnaq be nccyl gurz, fhpu nf 'tbbq,'
'qrnerfg,' 'haunccl.'

"V fcrag gur jvagre va guvf znaare.  Gur tragyr znaaref naq ornhgl bs
gur pbggntref terngyl raqrnerq gurz gb zr; jura gurl jrer haunccl, V
sryg qrcerffrq; jura gurl erwbvprq, V flzcnguvmrq va gurve wblf.  V fnj
srj uhzna orvatf orfvqrf gurz, naq vs nal bgure unccrarq gb ragre gur
pbggntr, gurve unefu znaaref naq ehqr tnvg bayl raunaprq gb zr gur
fhcrevbe nppbzcyvfuzragf bs zl sevraqf.  Gur byq zna, V pbhyq creprvir,
bsgra raqrnibherq gb rapbhentr uvf puvyqera, nf fbzrgvzrf V sbhaq gung
ur pnyyrq gurz, gb pnfg bss gurve zrynapubyl.  Ur jbhyq gnyx va n
purreshy npprag, jvgu na rkcerffvba bs tbbqarff gung orfgbjrq cyrnfher
rira hcba zr.  Ntngun yvfgrarq jvgu erfcrpg, ure rlrf fbzrgvzrf svyyrq
jvgu grnef, juvpu fur raqrnibherq gb jvcr njnl hacreprvirq; ohg V
trarenyyl sbhaq gung ure pbhagranapr naq gbar jrer zber purreshy nsgre
univat yvfgrarq gb gur rkubegngvbaf bs ure sngure.  Vg jnf abg guhf
jvgu Sryvk.  Ur jnf nyjnlf gur fnqqrfg bs gur tebhc, naq rira gb zl
hacenpgvfrq frafrf, ur nccrnerq gb unir fhssrerq zber qrrcyl guna uvf
sevraqf.  Ohg vs uvf pbhagranapr jnf zber fbeebjshy, uvf ibvpr jnf zber
purreshy guna gung bs uvf fvfgre, rfcrpvnyyl jura ur nqqerffrq gur byq
zna.

"V pbhyq zragvba vaahzrenoyr vafgnaprf juvpu, nygubhtu fyvtug, znexrq
gur qvfcbfvgvbaf bs gurfr nzvnoyr pbggntref.  Va gur zvqfg bs cbiregl
naq jnag, Sryvk pneevrq jvgu cyrnfher gb uvf fvfgre gur svefg yvggyr
juvgr sybjre gung crrcrq bhg sebz orarngu gur fabjl tebhaq.  Rneyl va
gur zbeavat, orsber fur unq evfra, ur pyrnerq njnl gur fabj gung
bofgehpgrq ure cngu gb gur zvyx-ubhfr, qerj jngre sebz gur jryy, naq
oebhtug gur jbbq sebz gur bhgubhfr, jurer, gb uvf crecrghny
nfgbavfuzrag, ur sbhaq uvf fgber nyjnlf ercyravfurq ol na vaivfvoyr
unaq.  Va gur qnl, V oryvrir, ur jbexrq fbzrgvzrf sbe n arvtuobhevat
snezre, orpnhfr ur bsgra jrag sbegu naq qvq abg erghea hagvy qvaare,
lrg oebhtug ab jbbq jvgu uvz.  Ng bgure gvzrf ur jbexrq va gur tneqra,
ohg nf gurer jnf yvggyr gb qb va gur sebfgl frnfba, ur ernq gb gur byq
zna naq Ntngun.

"Guvf ernqvat unq chmmyrq zr rkgerzryl ng svefg, ohg ol qrterrf V
qvfpbirerq gung ur hggrerq znal bs gur fnzr fbhaqf jura ur ernq nf jura
ur gnyxrq.  V pbawrpgherq, gurersber, gung ur sbhaq ba gur cncre fvtaf
sbe fcrrpu juvpu ur haqrefgbbq, naq V neqragyl ybatrq gb pbzceruraq
gurfr nyfb; ohg ubj jnf gung cbffvoyr jura V qvq abg rira haqrefgnaq
gur fbhaqf sbe juvpu gurl fgbbq nf fvtaf?  V vzcebirq, ubjrire,
frafvoyl va guvf fpvrapr, ohg abg fhssvpvragyl gb sbyybj hc nal xvaq bs
pbairefngvba, nygubhtu V nccyvrq zl jubyr zvaq gb gur raqrnibhe, sbe V
rnfvyl creprvirq gung, nygubhtu V rntreyl ybatrq gb qvfpbire zlfrys gb
gur pbggntref, V bhtug abg gb znxr gur nggrzcg hagvy V unq svefg orpbzr
znfgre bs gurve ynathntr, juvpu xabjyrqtr zvtug ranoyr zr gb znxr gurz
bireybbx gur qrsbezvgl bs zl svther, sbe jvgu guvf nyfb gur pbagenfg
crecrghnyyl cerfragrq gb zl rlrf unq znqr zr npdhnvagrq.

"V unq nqzverq gur cresrpg sbezf bs zl pbggntref--gurve tenpr, ornhgl,
naq qryvpngr pbzcyrkvbaf; ohg ubj jnf V greevsvrq jura V ivrjrq zlfrys
va n genafcnerag cbby!  Ng svefg V fgnegrq onpx, hanoyr gb oryvrir gung
vg jnf vaqrrq V jub jnf ersyrpgrq va gur zveebe; naq jura V orpnzr
shyyl pbaivaprq gung V jnf va ernyvgl gur zbafgre gung V nz, V jnf
svyyrq jvgu gur ovggrerfg frafngvbaf bs qrfcbaqrapr naq zbegvsvpngvba.
Nynf!  V qvq abg lrg ragveryl xabj gur sngny rssrpgf bs guvf zvfrenoyr
qrsbezvgl.

"Nf gur fha orpnzr jnezre naq gur yvtug bs qnl ybatre, gur fabj
inavfurq, naq V oruryq gur oner gerrf naq gur oynpx rnegu.  Sebz guvf
gvzr Sryvk jnf zber rzcyblrq, naq gur urneg-zbivat vaqvpngvbaf bs
vzcraqvat snzvar qvfnccrnerq.  Gurve sbbq, nf V nsgrejneqf sbhaq, jnf
pbnefr, ohg vg jnf jubyrfbzr; naq gurl cebpherq n fhssvpvrapl bs vg.
Frireny arj xvaqf bs cynagf fcenat hc va gur tneqra, juvpu gurl
qerffrq; naq gurfr fvtaf bs pbzsbeg vapernfrq qnvyl nf gur frnfba
nqinaprq.

"Gur byq zna, yrnavat ba uvf fba, jnyxrq rnpu qnl ng abba, jura vg qvq
abg enva, nf V sbhaq vg jnf pnyyrq jura gur urniraf cbherq sbegu vgf
jngref.  Guvf serdhragyl gbbx cynpr, ohg n uvtu jvaq dhvpxyl qevrq gur
rnegu, naq gur frnfba orpnzr sne zber cyrnfnag guna vg unq orra.

"Zl zbqr bs yvsr va zl ubiry jnf havsbez.  Qhevat gur zbeavat V
nggraqrq gur zbgvbaf bs gur pbggntref, naq jura gurl jrer qvfcrefrq va
inevbhf bpphcngvbaf, V fyrcg; gur erznvaqre bs gur qnl jnf fcrag va
bofreivat zl sevraqf.  Jura gurl unq ergverq gb erfg, vs gurer jnf nal
zbba be gur avtug jnf fgne-yvtug, V jrag vagb gur jbbqf naq pbyyrpgrq
zl bja sbbq naq shry sbe gur pbggntr.  Jura V erghearq, nf bsgra nf vg
jnf arprffnel, V pyrnerq gurve cngu sebz gur fabj naq cresbezrq gubfr
bssvprf gung V unq frra qbar ol Sryvk.  V nsgrejneqf sbhaq gung gurfr
ynobhef, cresbezrq ol na vaivfvoyr unaq, terngyl nfgbavfurq gurz; naq
bapr be gjvpr V urneq gurz, ba gurfr bppnfvbaf, hggre gur jbeqf 'tbbq
fcvevg,' 'jbaqreshy'; ohg V qvq abg gura haqrefgnaq gur fvtavsvpngvba
bs gurfr grezf.

"Zl gubhtugf abj orpnzr zber npgvir, naq V ybatrq gb qvfpbire gur
zbgvirf naq srryvatf bs gurfr ybiryl perngherf; V jnf vadhvfvgvir gb
xabj jul Sryvk nccrnerq fb zvfrenoyr naq Ntngun fb fnq.  V gubhtug
(sbbyvfu jergpu!) gung vg zvtug or va zl cbjre gb erfgber unccvarff gb
gurfr qrfreivat crbcyr.  Jura V fyrcg be jnf nofrag, gur sbezf bs gur
irarenoyr oyvaq sngure, gur tragyr Ntngun, naq gur rkpryyrag Sryvk
syvggrq orsber zr.  V ybbxrq hcba gurz nf fhcrevbe orvatf jub jbhyq or
gur neovgref bs zl shgher qrfgval.  V sbezrq va zl vzntvangvba n
gubhfnaq cvpgherf bs cerfragvat zlfrys gb gurz, naq gurve erprcgvba bs
zr.  V vzntvarq gung gurl jbhyq or qvfthfgrq, hagvy, ol zl tragyr
qrzrnabhe naq pbapvyvngvat jbeqf, V fubhyq svefg jva gurve snibhe naq
nsgrejneqf gurve ybir.

"Gurfr gubhtugf rkuvynengrq zr naq yrq zr gb nccyl jvgu serfu neqbhe gb
gur npdhvevat gur neg bs ynathntr.  Zl betnaf jrer vaqrrq unefu, ohg
fhccyr; naq nygubhtu zl ibvpr jnf irel hayvxr gur fbsg zhfvp bs gurve
gbarf, lrg V cebabhaprq fhpu jbeqf nf V haqrefgbbq jvgu gbyrenoyr rnfr.
Vg jnf nf gur nff naq gur ync-qbt; lrg fheryl gur tragyr nff jubfr
vagragvbaf jrer nssrpgvbangr, nygubhtu uvf znaaref jrer ehqr, qrfreirq
orggre gerngzrag guna oybjf naq rkrpengvba.

"Gur cyrnfnag fubjref naq travny jnezgu bs fcevat terngyl nygrerq gur
nfcrpg bs gur rnegu.  Zra jub orsber guvf punatr frrzrq gb unir orra
uvq va pnirf qvfcrefrq gurzfryirf naq jrer rzcyblrq va inevbhf negf bs
phygvingvba.  Gur oveqf fnat va zber purreshy abgrf, naq gur yrnirf
ortna gb ohq sbegu ba gur gerrf.  Unccl, unccl rnegu!  Svg unovgngvba
sbe tbqf, juvpu, fb fubeg n gvzr orsber, jnf oyrnx, qnzc, naq
hajubyrfbzr.  Zl fcvevgf jrer ryringrq ol gur rapunagvat nccrnenapr bs
angher; gur cnfg jnf oybggrq sebz zl zrzbel, gur cerfrag jnf genadhvy,
naq gur shgher tvyqrq ol oevtug enlf bs ubcr naq nagvpvcngvbaf bs wbl."



Puncgre 13

"V abj unfgra gb gur zber zbivat cneg bs zl fgbel.  V funyy eryngr
riragf gung vzcerffrq zr jvgu srryvatf juvpu, sebz jung V unq orra,
unir znqr zr jung V nz.

"Fcevat nqinaprq encvqyl; gur jrngure orpnzr svar naq gur fxvrf
pybhqyrff.  Vg fhecevfrq zr gung jung orsber jnf qrfreg naq tybbzl
fubhyq abj oybbz jvgu gur zbfg ornhgvshy sybjref naq ireqher.  Zl
frafrf jrer tengvsvrq naq erserfurq ol n gubhfnaq fpragf bs qryvtug naq
n gubhfnaq fvtugf bs ornhgl.

"Vg jnf ba bar bs gurfr qnlf, jura zl pbggntref crevbqvpnyyl erfgrq
sebz ynobhe--gur byq zna cynlrq ba uvf thvgne, naq gur puvyqera
yvfgrarq gb uvz--gung V bofreirq gur pbhagranapr bs Sryvk jnf
zrynapubyl orlbaq rkcerffvba; ur fvturq serdhragyl, naq bapr uvf sngure
cnhfrq va uvf zhfvp, naq V pbawrpgherq ol uvf znaare gung ur vadhverq
gur pnhfr bs uvf fba'f fbeebj.  Sryvk ercyvrq va n purreshy npprag, naq
gur byq zna jnf erpbzzrapvat uvf zhfvp jura fbzrbar gnccrq ng gur qbbe.

"Vg jnf n ynql ba ubefronpx, nppbzcnavrq ol n pbhagel-zna nf n thvqr.
Gur ynql jnf qerffrq va n qnex fhvg naq pbirerq jvgu n guvpx oynpx
irvy.  Ntngun nfxrq n dhrfgvba, gb juvpu gur fgenatre bayl ercyvrq ol
cebabhapvat, va n fjrrg npprag, gur anzr bs Sryvk.  Ure ibvpr jnf
zhfvpny ohg hayvxr gung bs rvgure bs zl sevraqf.  Ba urnevat guvf jbeq,
Sryvk pnzr hc unfgvyl gb gur ynql, jub, jura fur fnj uvz, guerj hc ure
irvy, naq V oruryq n pbhagranapr bs natryvp ornhgl naq rkcerffvba.  Ure
unve bs n fuvavat enira oynpx, naq phevbhfyl oenvqrq; ure rlrf jrer
qnex, ohg tragyr, nygubhtu navzngrq; ure srngherf bs n erthyne
cebcbegvba, naq ure pbzcyrkvba jbaqebhfyl snve, rnpu purrx gvatrq jvgu
n ybiryl cvax.

"Sryvk frrzrq enivfurq jvgu qryvtug jura ur fnj ure, rirel genvg bs
fbeebj inavfurq sebz uvf snpr, naq vg vafgnagyl rkcerffrq n qrterr bs
rpfgngvp wbl, bs juvpu V pbhyq uneqyl unir oryvrirq vg pncnoyr; uvf
rlrf fcnexyrq, nf uvf purrx syhfurq jvgu cyrnfher; naq ng gung zbzrag V
gubhtug uvz nf ornhgvshy nf gur fgenatre.  Fur nccrnerq nssrpgrq ol
qvssrerag srryvatf; jvcvat n srj grnef sebz ure ybiryl rlrf, fur uryq
bhg ure unaq gb Sryvk, jub xvffrq vg encghebhfyl naq pnyyrq ure, nf
jryy nf V pbhyq qvfgvathvfu, uvf fjrrg Nenovna.  Fur qvq abg nccrne gb
haqrefgnaq uvz, ohg fzvyrq.  Ur nffvfgrq ure gb qvfzbhag, naq
qvfzvffvat ure thvqr, pbaqhpgrq ure vagb gur pbggntr.  Fbzr
pbairefngvba gbbx cynpr orgjrra uvz naq uvf sngure, naq gur lbhat
fgenatre xaryg ng gur byq zna'f srrg naq jbhyq unir xvffrq uvf unaq,
ohg ur envfrq ure naq rzoenprq ure nssrpgvbangryl.

"V fbba creprvirq gung nygubhtu gur fgenatre hggrerq negvphyngr fbhaqf
naq nccrnerq gb unir n ynathntr bs ure bja, fur jnf arvgure haqrefgbbq
ol abe urefrys haqrefgbbq gur pbggntref.  Gurl znqr znal fvtaf juvpu V
qvq abg pbzceruraq, ohg V fnj gung ure cerfrapr qvsshfrq tynqarff
guebhtu gur pbggntr, qvfcryyvat gurve fbeebj nf gur fha qvffvcngrf gur
zbeavat zvfgf.  Sryvk frrzrq crphyvneyl unccl naq jvgu fzvyrf bs
qryvtug jrypbzrq uvf Nenovna.  Ntngun, gur rire-tragyr Ntngun, xvffrq
gur unaqf bs gur ybiryl fgenatre, naq cbvagvat gb ure oebgure, znqr
fvtaf juvpu nccrnerq gb zr gb zrna gung ur unq orra fbeebjshy hagvy fur
pnzr.  Fbzr ubhef cnffrq guhf, juvyr gurl, ol gurve pbhagranaprf,
rkcerffrq wbl, gur pnhfr bs juvpu V qvq abg pbzceruraq.  Cerfragyl V
sbhaq, ol gur serdhrag erpheerapr bs fbzr fbhaq juvpu gur fgenatre
ercrngrq nsgre gurz, gung fur jnf raqrnibhevat gb yrnea gurve ynathntr;
naq gur vqrn vafgnagyl bppheerq gb zr gung V fubhyq znxr hfr bs gur
fnzr vafgehpgvbaf gb gur fnzr raq.  Gur fgenatre yrnearq nobhg gjragl
jbeqf ng gur svefg yrffba; zbfg bs gurz, vaqrrq, jrer gubfr juvpu V unq
orsber haqrefgbbq, ohg V cebsvgrq ol gur bguref.

"Nf avtug pnzr ba, Ntngun naq gur Nenovna ergverq rneyl.  Jura gurl
frcnengrq Sryvk xvffrq gur unaq bs gur fgenatre naq fnvq, 'Tbbq avtug
fjrrg Fnsvr.'  Ur fng hc zhpu ybatre, pbairefvat jvgu uvf sngure, naq
ol gur serdhrag ercrgvgvba bs ure anzr V pbawrpgherq gung gurve ybiryl
thrfg jnf gur fhowrpg bs gurve pbairefngvba.  V neqragyl qrfverq gb
haqrefgnaq gurz, naq orag rirel snphygl gbjneqf gung checbfr, ohg sbhaq
vg hggreyl vzcbffvoyr.

"Gur arkg zbeavat Sryvk jrag bhg gb uvf jbex, naq nsgre gur hfhny
bpphcngvbaf bs Ntngun jrer svavfurq, gur Nenovna fng ng gur srrg bs gur
byq zna, naq gnxvat uvf thvgne, cynlrq fbzr nvef fb ragenapvatyl
ornhgvshy gung gurl ng bapr qerj grnef bs fbeebj naq qryvtug sebz zl
rlrf.  Fur fnat, naq ure ibvpr sybjrq va n evpu pnqrapr, fjryyvat be
qlvat njnl yvxr n avtugvatnyr bs gur jbbqf.

"Jura fur unq svavfurq, fur tnir gur thvgne gb Ntngun, jub ng svefg
qrpyvarq vg.  Fur cynlrq n fvzcyr nve, naq ure ibvpr nppbzcnavrq vg va
fjrrg nppragf, ohg hayvxr gur jbaqebhf fgenva bs gur fgenatre.  Gur byq
zna nccrnerq raencgherq naq fnvq fbzr jbeqf juvpu Ntngun raqrnibherq gb
rkcynva gb Fnsvr, naq ol juvpu ur nccrnerq gb jvfu gb rkcerff gung fur
orfgbjrq ba uvz gur terngrfg qryvtug ol ure zhfvp.

"Gur qnlf abj cnffrq nf crnprnoyl nf orsber, jvgu gur fbyr nygrengvba
gung wbl unq gnxra cynpr bs fnqarff va gur pbhagranaprf bs zl sevraqf.
Fnsvr jnf nyjnlf tnl naq unccl; fur naq V vzcebirq encvqyl va gur
xabjyrqtr bs ynathntr, fb gung va gjb zbaguf V ortna gb pbzceruraq zbfg
bs gur jbeqf hggrerq ol zl cebgrpgbef.

"Va gur zrnajuvyr nyfb gur oynpx tebhaq jnf pbirerq jvgu ureontr, naq
gur terra onaxf vagrefcrefrq jvgu vaahzrenoyr sybjref, fjrrg gb gur
fprag naq gur rlrf, fgnef bs cnyr enqvnapr nzbat gur zbbayvtug jbbqf;
gur fha orpnzr jnezre, gur avtugf pyrne naq onyzl; naq zl abpgheany
enzoyrf jrer na rkgerzr cyrnfher gb zr, nygubhtu gurl jrer pbafvqrenoyl
fubegrarq ol gur yngr frggvat naq rneyl evfvat bs gur fha, sbe V arire
iragherq noebnq qhevat qnlyvtug, srneshy bs zrrgvat jvgu gur fnzr
gerngzrag V unq sbezreyl raqherq va gur svefg ivyyntr juvpu V ragrerq.

"Zl qnlf jrer fcrag va pybfr nggragvba, gung V zvtug zber fcrrqvyl
znfgre gur ynathntr; naq V znl obnfg gung V vzcebirq zber encvqyl guna
gur Nenovna, jub haqrefgbbq irel yvggyr naq pbairefrq va oebxra
nppragf, juvyfg V pbzceruraqrq naq pbhyq vzvgngr nyzbfg rirel jbeq gung
jnf fcbxra.

"Juvyr V vzcebirq va fcrrpu, V nyfb yrnearq gur fpvrapr bs yrggref nf
vg jnf gnhtug gb gur fgenatre, naq guvf bcrarq orsber zr n jvqr svryq
sbe jbaqre naq qryvtug.

"Gur obbx sebz juvpu Sryvk vafgehpgrq Fnsvr jnf Ibyarl'f Ehvaf bs
Rzcverf.  V fubhyq abg unir haqrefgbbq gur checbeg bs guvf obbx unq abg
Sryvk, va ernqvat vg, tvira irel zvahgr rkcynangvbaf.  Ur unq pubfra
guvf jbex, ur fnvq, orpnhfr gur qrpynzngbel fglyr jnf senzrq va
vzvgngvba bs gur Rnfgrea nhgubef.  Guebhtu guvf jbex V bognvarq n
phefbel xabjyrqtr bs uvfgbel naq n ivrj bs gur frireny rzcverf ng
cerfrag rkvfgvat va gur jbeyq; vg tnir zr na vafvtug vagb gur znaaref,
tbireazragf, naq eryvtvbaf bs gur qvssrerag angvbaf bs gur rnegu.  V
urneq bs gur fybgushy Nfvngvpf, bs gur fghcraqbhf travhf naq zragny
npgvivgl bs gur Terpvnaf, bs gur jnef naq jbaqreshy iveghr bs gur rneyl
Ebznaf--bs gurve fhofrdhrag qrtrarengvat--bs gur qrpyvar bs gung zvtugl
rzcver, bs puvinyel, Puevfgvnavgl, naq xvatf.  V urneq bs gur qvfpbirel
bs gur Nzrevpna urzvfcurer naq jrcg jvgu Fnsvr bire gur uncyrff sngr bs
vgf bevtvany vaunovgnagf.

"Gurfr jbaqreshy aneengvbaf vafcverq zr jvgu fgenatr srryvatf.  Jnf
zna, vaqrrq, ng bapr fb cbjreshy, fb iveghbhf naq zntavsvprag, lrg fb
ivpvbhf naq onfr?  Ur nccrnerq ng bar gvzr n zrer fpvba bs gur rivy
cevapvcyr naq ng nabgure nf nyy gung pna or pbaprvirq bs aboyr naq
tbqyvxr.  Gb or n terng naq iveghbhf zna nccrnerq gur uvturfg ubabhe
gung pna orsnyy n frafvgvir orvat; gb or onfr naq ivpvbhf, nf znal ba
erpbeq unir orra, nccrnerq gur ybjrfg qrtenqngvba, n pbaqvgvba zber
nowrpg guna gung bs gur oyvaq zbyr be unezyrff jbez.  Sbe n ybat gvzr V
pbhyq abg pbaprvir ubj bar zna pbhyq tb sbegu gb zheqre uvf sryybj, be
rira jul gurer jrer ynjf naq tbireazragf; ohg jura V urneq qrgnvyf bs
ivpr naq oybbqfurq, zl jbaqre prnfrq naq V ghearq njnl jvgu qvfthfg naq
ybnguvat.

"Rirel pbairefngvba bs gur pbggntref abj bcrarq arj jbaqref gb zr.
Juvyr V yvfgrarq gb gur vafgehpgvbaf juvpu Sryvk orfgbjrq hcba gur
Nenovna, gur fgenatr flfgrz bs uhzna fbpvrgl jnf rkcynvarq gb zr.  V
urneq bs gur qvivfvba bs cebcregl, bs vzzrafr jrnygu naq fdhnyvq
cbiregl, bs enax, qrfprag, naq aboyr oybbq.

"Gur jbeqf vaqhprq zr gb ghea gbjneqf zlfrys.  V yrnearq gung gur
cbffrffvbaf zbfg rfgrrzrq ol lbhe sryybj perngherf jrer uvtu naq
hafhyyvrq qrfprag havgrq jvgu evpurf.  N zna zvtug or erfcrpgrq jvgu
bayl bar bs gurfr nqinagntrf, ohg jvgubhg rvgure ur jnf pbafvqrerq,
rkprcg va irel ener vafgnaprf, nf n intnobaq naq n fynir, qbbzrq gb
jnfgr uvf cbjref sbe gur cebsvgf bs gur pubfra srj!  Naq jung jnf V? Bs
zl perngvba naq perngbe V jnf nofbyhgryl vtabenag, ohg V xarj gung V
cbffrffrq ab zbarl, ab sevraqf, ab xvaq bs cebcregl.  V jnf, orfvqrf,
raqhrq jvgu n svther uvqrbhfyl qrsbezrq naq ybngufbzr; V jnf abg rira
bs gur fnzr angher nf zna.  V jnf zber ntvyr guna gurl naq pbhyq
fhofvfg hcba pbnefre qvrg; V ober gur rkgerzrf bs urng naq pbyq jvgu
yrff vawhel gb zl senzr; zl fgngher sne rkprrqrq gurvef.  Jura V ybbxrq
nebhaq V fnj naq urneq bs abar yvxr zr.  Jnf V, gura, n zbafgre, n oybg
hcba gur rnegu, sebz juvpu nyy zra syrq naq jubz nyy zra qvfbjarq?

"V pnaabg qrfpevor gb lbh gur ntbal gung gurfr ersyrpgvbaf vasyvpgrq
hcba zr; V gevrq gb qvfcry gurz, ohg fbeebj bayl vapernfrq jvgu
xabjyrqtr.  Bu, gung V unq sberire erznvarq va zl angvir jbbq, abe
xabja abe sryg orlbaq gur frafngvbaf bs uhatre, guvefg, naq urng!

"Bs jung n fgenatr angher vf xabjyrqtr!  Vg pyvatf gb gur zvaq jura vg
unf bapr frvmrq ba vg yvxr n yvpura ba gur ebpx.  V jvfurq fbzrgvzrf gb
funxr bss nyy gubhtug naq srryvat, ohg V yrnearq gung gurer jnf ohg bar
zrnaf gb birepbzr gur frafngvba bs cnva, naq gung jnf qrngu--n fgngr
juvpu V srnerq lrg qvq abg haqrefgnaq.  V nqzverq iveghr naq tbbq
srryvatf naq ybirq gur tragyr znaaref naq nzvnoyr dhnyvgvrf bs zl
pbggntref, ohg V jnf fuhg bhg sebz vagrepbhefr jvgu gurz, rkprcg
guebhtu zrnaf juvpu V bognvarq ol fgrnygu, jura V jnf hafrra naq
haxabja, naq juvpu engure vapernfrq guna fngvfsvrq gur qrfver V unq bs
orpbzvat bar nzbat zl sryybjf.  Gur tragyr jbeqf bs Ntngun naq  gur
navzngrq fzvyrf bs gur punezvat Nenovna jrer abg sbe zr.  Gur zvyq
rkubegngvbaf bs gur byq zna naq gur yviryl pbairefngvba bs gur ybirq
Sryvk jrer abg sbe zr. Zvfrenoyr, haunccl jergpu!

"Bgure yrffbaf jrer vzcerffrq hcba zr rira zber qrrcyl.  V urneq bs gur
qvssrerapr bs frkrf, naq gur ovegu naq tebjgu bs puvyqera, ubj gur
sngure qbgrq ba gur fzvyrf bs gur vasnag, naq gur yviryl fnyyvrf bs gur
byqre puvyq, ubj nyy gur yvsr naq pnerf bs gur zbgure jrer jenccrq hc
va gur cerpvbhf punetr, ubj gur zvaq bs lbhgu rkcnaqrq naq tnvarq
xabjyrqtr, bs oebgure, fvfgre, naq nyy gur inevbhf eryngvbafuvcf juvpu
ovaq bar uhzna orvat gb nabgure va zhghny obaqf.

"Ohg jurer jrer zl sevraqf naq eryngvbaf?  Ab sngure unq jngpurq zl
vasnag qnlf, ab zbgure unq oyrffrq zr jvgu fzvyrf naq pnerffrf; be vs
gurl unq, nyy zl cnfg yvsr jnf abj n oybg, n oyvaq inpnapl va juvpu V
qvfgvathvfurq abguvat.  Sebz zl rneyvrfg erzrzoenapr V unq orra nf V
gura jnf va urvtug naq cebcbegvba.  V unq arire lrg frra n orvat
erfrzoyvat zr be jub pynvzrq nal vagrepbhefr jvgu zr.  Jung jnf V?  Gur
dhrfgvba ntnva erpheerq, gb or nafjrerq bayl jvgu tebnaf.

"V jvyy fbba rkcynva gb jung gurfr srryvatf graqrq, ohg nyybj zr abj gb
erghea gb gur pbggntref, jubfr fgbel rkpvgrq va zr fhpu inevbhf
srryvatf bs vaqvtangvba, qryvtug, naq jbaqre, ohg juvpu nyy grezvangrq
va nqqvgvbany ybir naq erirerapr sbe zl cebgrpgbef (sbe fb V ybirq, va
na vaabprag, unys-cnvashy frys-qrprvg, gb pnyy gurz)."



Puncgre 14

"Fbzr gvzr ryncfrq orsber V yrnearq gur uvfgbel bs zl sevraqf.  Vg jnf
bar juvpu pbhyq abg snvy gb vzcerff vgfrys qrrcyl ba zl zvaq, hasbyqvat
nf vg qvq n ahzore bs pvephzfgnaprf, rnpu vagrerfgvat naq jbaqreshy gb
bar fb hggreyl varkcrevraprq nf V jnf.

"Gur anzr bs gur byq zna jnf Qr Ynprl.  Ur jnf qrfpraqrq sebz n tbbq
snzvyl va Senapr, jurer ur unq yvirq sbe znal lrnef va nssyhrapr,
erfcrpgrq ol uvf fhcrevbef naq orybirq ol uvf rdhnyf.  Uvf fba jnf oerq
va gur freivpr bs uvf pbhagel, naq Ntngun unq enaxrq jvgu ynqvrf bs gur
uvturfg qvfgvapgvba.  N srj zbaguf orsber zl neeviny gurl unq yvirq va
n ynetr naq yhkhevbhf pvgl pnyyrq Cnevf, fheebhaqrq ol sevraqf naq
cbffrffrq bs rirel rawblzrag juvpu iveghr, ersvarzrag bs vagryyrpg, be
gnfgr, nppbzcnavrq ol n zbqrengr sbeghar, pbhyq nssbeq.

"Gur sngure bs Fnsvr unq orra gur pnhfr bs gurve ehva.  Ur jnf n
Ghexvfu zrepunag naq unq vaunovgrq Cnevf sbe znal lrnef, jura, sbe fbzr
ernfba juvpu V pbhyq abg yrnea, ur orpnzr boabkvbhf gb gur tbireazrag.
Ur jnf frvmrq naq pnfg vagb cevfba gur irel qnl gung Fnsvr neevirq sebz
Pbafgnagvabcyr gb wbva uvz.  Ur jnf gevrq naq pbaqrzarq gb qrngu.  Gur
vawhfgvpr bs uvf fragrapr jnf irel syntenag; nyy Cnevf jnf vaqvtanag;
naq vg jnf whqtrq gung uvf eryvtvba naq jrnygu engure guna gur pevzr
nyyrtrq ntnvafg uvz unq orra gur pnhfr bs uvf pbaqrzangvba.

"Sryvk unq nppvqragnyyl orra cerfrag ng gur gevny; uvf ubeebe naq
vaqvtangvba jrer hapbagebyynoyr jura ur urneq gur qrpvfvba bs gur
pbheg.  Ur znqr, ng gung zbzrag, n fbyrza ibj gb qryvire uvz naq gura
ybbxrq nebhaq sbe gur zrnaf.  Nsgre znal sehvgyrff nggrzcgf gb tnva
nqzvggnapr gb gur cevfba, ur sbhaq n fgebatyl tengrq jvaqbj va na
hathneqrq cneg bs gur ohvyqvat, juvpu yvtugrq gur qhatrba bs gur
hasbeghangr Zhunzznqna, jub, ybnqrq jvgu punvaf, jnvgrq va qrfcnve gur
rkrphgvba bs gur oneonebhf fragrapr.  Sryvk ivfvgrq gur tengr ng avtug
naq znqr xabja gb gur cevfbare uvf vagragvbaf va uvf snibhe.  Gur Ghex,
nznmrq naq qryvtugrq, raqrnibherq gb xvaqyr gur mrny bs uvf qryvirere
ol cebzvfrf bs erjneq naq jrnygu.  Sryvk erwrpgrq uvf bssref jvgu
pbagrzcg, lrg jura ur fnj gur ybiryl Fnsvr, jub jnf nyybjrq gb ivfvg
ure sngure naq jub ol ure trfgherf rkcerffrq ure yviryl tengvghqr, gur
lbhgu pbhyq abg uryc bjavat gb uvf bja zvaq gung gur pncgvir cbffrffrq
n gernfher juvpu jbhyq shyyl erjneq uvf gbvy naq unmneq.

"Gur Ghex dhvpxyl creprvirq gur vzcerffvba gung uvf qnhtugre unq znqr
ba gur urneg bs Sryvk naq raqrnibherq gb frpher uvz zber ragveryl va
uvf vagrerfgf ol gur cebzvfr bs ure unaq va zneevntr fb fbba nf ur
fubhyq or pbairlrq gb n cynpr bs fnsrgl.  Sryvk jnf gbb qryvpngr gb
npprcg guvf bssre, lrg ur ybbxrq sbejneq gb gur cebonovyvgl bs gur
rirag nf gb gur pbafhzzngvba bs uvf unccvarff.

"Qhevat gur rafhvat qnlf, juvyr gur cercnengvbaf jrer tbvat sbejneq sbe
gur rfpncr bs gur zrepunag, gur mrny bs Sryvk jnf jnezrq ol frireny
yrggref gung ur erprvirq sebz guvf ybiryl tvey, jub sbhaq zrnaf gb
rkcerff ure gubhtugf va gur ynathntr bs ure ybire ol gur nvq bs na byq
zna, n freinag bs ure sngure jub haqrefgbbq Serapu.  Fur gunaxrq uvz va
gur zbfg neqrag grezf sbe uvf vagraqrq freivprf gbjneqf ure cnerag, naq
ng gur fnzr gvzr fur tragyl qrcyberq ure bja sngr.

"V unir pbcvrf bs gurfr yrggref, sbe V sbhaq zrnaf, qhevat zl erfvqrapr
va gur ubiry, gb cebpher gur vzcyrzragf bs jevgvat; naq gur yrggref
jrer bsgra va gur unaqf bs Sryvk be Ntngun.  Orsber V qrcneg V jvyy
tvir gurz gb lbh; gurl jvyy cebir gur gehgu bs zl gnyr; ohg ng cerfrag,
nf gur fha vf nyernql sne qrpyvarq, V funyy bayl unir gvzr gb ercrng
gur fhofgnapr bs gurz gb lbh.

"Fnsvr eryngrq gung ure zbgure jnf n Puevfgvna Neno, frvmrq naq znqr n
fynir ol gur Ghexf; erpbzzraqrq ol ure ornhgl, fur unq jba gur urneg bs
gur sngure bs Fnsvr, jub zneevrq ure.  Gur lbhat tvey fcbxr va uvtu naq
raguhfvnfgvp grezf bs ure zbgure, jub, obea va serrqbz, fchearq gur
obaqntr gb juvpu fur jnf abj erqhprq.  Fur vafgehpgrq ure qnhtugre va
gur grargf bs ure eryvtvba naq gnhtug ure gb nfcver gb uvture cbjref bs
vagryyrpg naq na vaqrcraqrapr bs fcvevg sbeovqqra gb gur srznyr
sbyybjref bs Zhunzznq.  Guvf ynql qvrq, ohg ure yrffbaf jrer vaqryvoyl
vzcerffrq ba gur zvaq bs Fnsvr, jub fvpxrarq ng gur cebfcrpg bs ntnva
ergheavat gb Nfvn naq orvat vzzherq jvguva gur jnyyf bs n unerz,
nyybjrq bayl gb bpphcl urefrys jvgu vasnagvyr nzhfrzragf, vyy-fhvgrq gb
gur grzcre bs ure fbhy, abj npphfgbzrq gb tenaq vqrnf naq n aboyr
rzhyngvba sbe iveghr.  Gur cebfcrpg bs zneelvat n Puevfgvna naq
erznvavat va n pbhagel jurer jbzra jrer nyybjrq gb gnxr n enax va
fbpvrgl jnf rapunagvat gb ure.

"Gur qnl sbe gur rkrphgvba bs gur Ghex jnf svkrq, ohg ba gur avtug
cerivbhf gb vg ur dhvggrq uvf cevfba naq orsber zbeavat jnf qvfgnag
znal yrnthrf sebz Cnevf.  Sryvk unq cebpherq cnffcbegf va gur anzr bs
uvf sngure, fvfgre, naq uvzfrys.  Ur unq cerivbhfyl pbzzhavpngrq uvf
cyna gb gur sbezre, jub nvqrq gur qrprvg ol dhvggvat uvf ubhfr, haqre
gur cergrapr bs n wbhearl naq pbaprnyrq uvzfrys, jvgu uvf qnhtugre, va
na bofpher cneg bs Cnevf.

"Sryvk pbaqhpgrq gur shtvgvirf guebhtu Senapr gb Ylbaf naq npebff Zbag
Pravf gb Yrtubea, jurer gur zrepunag unq qrpvqrq gb jnvg n snibhenoyr
bccbeghavgl bs cnffvat vagb fbzr cneg bs gur Ghexvfu qbzvavbaf.

"Fnsvr erfbyirq gb erznva jvgu ure sngure hagvy gur zbzrag bs uvf
qrcnegher, orsber juvpu gvzr gur Ghex erarjrq uvf cebzvfr gung fur
fubhyq or havgrq gb uvf qryvirere; naq Sryvk erznvarq jvgu gurz va
rkcrpgngvba bs gung rirag; naq va gur zrnagvzr ur rawblrq gur fbpvrgl
bs gur Nenovna, jub rkuvovgrq gbjneqf uvz gur fvzcyrfg naq graqrerfg
nssrpgvba.  Gurl pbairefrq jvgu bar nabgure guebhtu gur zrnaf bs na
vagrecergre, naq fbzrgvzrf jvgu gur vagrecergngvba bs ybbxf; naq Fnsvr
fnat gb uvz gur qvivar nvef bs ure angvir pbhagel.

"Gur Ghex nyybjrq guvf vagvznpl gb gnxr cynpr naq rapbhentrq gur ubcrf
bs gur lbhgushy ybiref, juvyr va uvf urneg ur unq sbezrq sne bgure
cynaf.  Ur ybngurq gur vqrn gung uvf qnhtugre fubhyq or havgrq gb n
Puevfgvna, ohg ur srnerq gur erfragzrag bs Sryvk vs ur fubhyq nccrne
yhxrjnez, sbe ur xarj gung ur jnf fgvyy va gur cbjre bs uvf qryvirere
vs ur fubhyq pubbfr gb orgenl uvz gb gur Vgnyvna fgngr juvpu gurl
vaunovgrq.  Ur eribyirq n gubhfnaq cynaf ol juvpu ur fubhyq or ranoyrq
gb cebybat gur qrprvg hagvy vg zvtug or ab ybatre arprffnel, naq
frpergyl gb gnxr uvf qnhtugre jvgu uvz jura ur qrcnegrq.  Uvf cynaf
jrer snpvyvgngrq ol gur arjf juvpu neevirq sebz Cnevf.

"Gur tbireazrag bs Senapr jrer terngyl raentrq ng gur rfpncr bs gurve
ivpgvz naq fcnerq ab cnvaf gb qrgrpg naq chavfu uvf qryvirere.  Gur
cybg bs Sryvk jnf dhvpxyl qvfpbirerq, naq Qr Ynprl naq Ntngun jrer
guebja vagb cevfba.  Gur arjf ernpurq Sryvk naq ebhfrq uvz sebz uvf
qernz bs cyrnfher.  Uvf oyvaq naq ntrq sngure naq uvf tragyr fvfgre ynl
va n abvfbzr qhatrba juvyr ur rawblrq gur serr nve naq gur fbpvrgl bs
ure jubz ur ybirq.  Guvf vqrn jnf gbegher gb uvz.  Ur dhvpxyl neenatrq
jvgu gur Ghex gung vs gur ynggre fubhyq svaq n snibhenoyr bccbeghavgl
sbe rfpncr orsber Sryvk pbhyq erghea gb Vgnyl, Fnsvr fubhyq erznva nf n
obneqre ng n pbairag ng Yrtubea; naq gura, dhvggvat gur ybiryl Nenovna,
ur unfgrarq gb Cnevf naq qryvirerq uvzfrys hc gb gur iratrnapr bs gur
ynj, ubcvat gb serr Qr Ynprl naq Ntngun ol guvf cebprrqvat.

"Ur qvq abg fhpprrq.  Gurl erznvarq pbasvarq sbe svir zbaguf orsber gur
gevny gbbx cynpr, gur erfhyg bs juvpu qrcevirq gurz bs gurve sbeghar
naq pbaqrzarq gurz gb n crecrghny rkvyr sebz gurve angvir pbhagel.

"Gurl sbhaq n zvfrenoyr nflyhz va gur pbggntr va Treznal, jurer V
qvfpbirerq gurz.  Sryvk fbba yrnearq gung gur gernpurebhf Ghex, sbe
jubz ur naq uvf snzvyl raqherq fhpu haurneq-bs bccerffvba, ba
qvfpbirevat gung uvf qryvirere jnf guhf erqhprq gb cbiregl naq ehva,
orpnzr n genvgbe gb tbbq srryvat naq ubabhe naq unq dhvggrq Vgnyl jvgu
uvf qnhtugre, vafhygvatyl fraqvat Sryvk n cvggnapr bs zbarl gb nvq uvz,
nf ur fnvq, va fbzr cyna bs shgher znvagranapr.

"Fhpu jrer gur riragf gung cerlrq ba gur urneg bs Sryvk naq eraqrerq
uvz, jura V svefg fnj uvz, gur zbfg zvfrenoyr bs uvf snzvyl.  Ur pbhyq
unir raqherq cbiregl, naq juvyr guvf qvfgerff unq orra gur zrrq bs uvf
iveghr, ur tybevrq va vg; ohg gur vatengvghqr bs gur Ghex naq gur ybff
bs uvf orybirq Fnsvr jrer zvfsbegharf zber ovggre naq veercnenoyr.  Gur
neeviny bs gur Nenovna abj vashfrq arj yvsr vagb uvf fbhy.

"Jura gur arjf ernpurq Yrtubea gung Sryvk jnf qrcevirq bs uvf jrnygu
naq enax, gur zrepunag pbzznaqrq uvf qnhtugre gb guvax ab zber bs ure
ybire, ohg gb cercner gb erghea gb ure angvir pbhagel.  Gur trarebhf
angher bs Fnsvr jnf bhgentrq ol guvf pbzznaq; fur nggrzcgrq gb
rkcbfghyngr jvgu ure sngure, ohg ur yrsg ure natevyl, ervgrengvat uvf
glenaavpny znaqngr.

"N srj qnlf nsgre, gur Ghex ragrerq uvf qnhtugre'f ncnegzrag naq gbyq
ure unfgvyl gung ur unq ernfba gb oryvrir gung uvf erfvqrapr ng Yrtubea
unq orra qvihytrq naq gung ur fubhyq fcrrqvyl or qryvirerq hc gb gur
Serapu tbireazrag; ur unq pbafrdhragyl uverq n irffry gb pbairl uvz gb
Pbafgnagvabcyr, sbe juvpu pvgl ur fubhyq fnvy va n srj ubhef.  Ur
vagraqrq gb yrnir uvf qnhtugre haqre gur pner bs n pbasvqragvny
freinag, gb sbyybj ng ure yrvfher jvgu gur terngre cneg bs uvf
cebcregl, juvpu unq abg lrg neevirq ng Yrtubea.

"Jura nybar, Fnsvr erfbyirq va ure bja zvaq gur cyna bs pbaqhpg gung vg
jbhyq orpbzr ure gb chefhr va guvf rzretrapl.  N erfvqrapr va Ghexrl
jnf noubeerag gb ure; ure eryvtvba naq ure srryvatf jrer nyvxr nirefr
gb vg.  Ol fbzr cncref bs ure sngure juvpu sryy vagb ure unaqf fur
urneq bs gur rkvyr bs ure ybire naq yrneag gur anzr bs gur fcbg jurer
ur gura erfvqrq.  Fur urfvgngrq fbzr gvzr, ohg ng yratgu fur sbezrq ure
qrgrezvangvba.  Gnxvat jvgu ure fbzr wrjryf gung orybatrq gb ure naq n
fhz bs zbarl, fur dhvggrq Vgnyl jvgu na nggraqnag, n angvir bs Yrtubea,
ohg jub haqrefgbbq gur pbzzba ynathntr bs Ghexrl, naq qrcnegrq sbe
Treznal.

"Fur neevirq va fnsrgl ng n gbja nobhg gjragl yrnthrf sebz gur pbggntr
bs Qr Ynprl, jura ure nggraqnag sryy qnatrebhfyl vyy.  Fnsvr ahefrq ure
jvgu gur zbfg qribgrq nssrpgvba, ohg gur cbbe tvey qvrq, naq gur
Nenovna jnf yrsg nybar, hanpdhnvagrq jvgu gur ynathntr bs gur pbhagel
naq hggreyl vtabenag bs gur phfgbzf bs gur jbeyq.  Fur sryy, ubjrire,
vagb tbbq unaqf.  Gur Vgnyvna unq zragvbarq gur anzr bs gur fcbg sbe
juvpu gurl jrer obhaq, naq nsgre ure qrngu gur jbzna bs gur ubhfr va
juvpu gurl unq yvirq gbbx pner gung Fnsvr fubhyq neevir va fnsrgl ng
gur pbggntr bs ure ybire."



Puncgre 15

"Fhpu jnf gur uvfgbel bs zl orybirq pbggntref.  Vg vzcerffrq zr qrrcyl.
V yrnearq, sebz gur ivrjf bs fbpvny yvsr juvpu vg qrirybcrq, gb nqzver
gurve iveghrf naq gb qrcerpngr gur ivprf bs znaxvaq.

"Nf lrg V ybbxrq hcba pevzr nf n qvfgnag rivy, oraribyrapr naq
trarebfvgl jrer rire cerfrag orsber zr, vapvgvat jvguva zr n qrfver gb
orpbzr na npgbe va gur ohfl fprar jurer fb znal nqzvenoyr dhnyvgvrf
jrer pnyyrq sbegu naq qvfcynlrq.  Ohg va tvivat na nppbhag bs gur
cebterff bs zl vagryyrpg, V zhfg abg bzvg n pvephzfgnapr juvpu bppheerq
va gur ortvaavat bs gur zbagu bs Nhthfg bs gur fnzr lrne.

"Bar avtug qhevat zl npphfgbzrq ivfvg gb gur arvtuobhevat jbbq jurer V
pbyyrpgrq zl bja sbbq naq oebhtug ubzr svevat sbe zl cebgrpgbef, V
sbhaq ba gur tebhaq n yrngurea cbegznagrnh pbagnvavat frireny negvpyrf
bs qerff naq fbzr obbxf.  V rntreyl frvmrq gur cevmr naq erghearq jvgu
vg gb zl ubiry.  Sbeghangryl gur obbxf jrer jevggra va gur ynathntr,
gur ryrzragf bs juvpu V unq npdhverq ng gur pbggntr; gurl pbafvfgrq bs
Cnenqvfr Ybfg, n ibyhzr bs Cyhgnepu'f Yvirf, naq gur Fbeebjf bs Jregre.
Gur cbffrffvba bs gurfr gernfherf tnir zr rkgerzr qryvtug; V abj
pbagvahnyyl fghqvrq naq rkrepvfrq zl zvaq hcba gurfr uvfgbevrf, juvyfg
zl sevraqf jrer rzcyblrq va gurve beqvanel bpphcngvbaf.

"V pna uneqyl qrfpevor gb lbh gur rssrpg bs gurfr obbxf.  Gurl cebqhprq
va zr na vasvavgl bs arj vzntrf naq srryvatf, gung fbzrgvzrf envfrq zr
gb rpfgnfl, ohg zber serdhragyl fhax zr vagb gur ybjrfg qrwrpgvba.  Va
gur Fbeebjf bs Jregre, orfvqrf gur vagrerfg bs vgf fvzcyr naq nssrpgvat
fgbel, fb znal bcvavbaf ner pnainffrq naq fb znal yvtugf guebja hcba
jung unq uvguregb orra gb zr bofpher fhowrpgf gung V sbhaq va vg n
arire-raqvat fbhepr bs fcrphyngvba naq nfgbavfuzrag.  Gur tragyr naq
qbzrfgvp znaaref vg qrfpevorq, pbzovarq jvgu ybsgl fragvzragf naq
srryvatf, juvpu unq sbe gurve bowrpg fbzrguvat bhg bs frys, nppbeqrq
jryy jvgu zl rkcrevrapr nzbat zl cebgrpgbef naq jvgu gur jnagf juvpu
jrer sberire nyvir va zl bja obfbz.  Ohg V gubhtug Jregre uvzfrys n
zber qvivar orvat guna V unq rire oruryq be vzntvarq; uvf punenpgre
pbagnvarq ab cergrafvba, ohg vg fnax qrrc.  Gur qvfdhvfvgvbaf hcba
qrngu naq fhvpvqr jrer pnyphyngrq gb svyy  zr jvgu jbaqre.  V qvq abg
cergraq gb ragre vagb gur zrevgf bs gur pnfr, lrg V vapyvarq gbjneqf
gur bcvavbaf bs gur ureb, jubfr rkgvapgvba V jrcg, jvgubhg cerpvfryl
haqrefgnaqvat vg.

"Nf V ernq, ubjrire, V nccyvrq zhpu crefbanyyl gb zl bja srryvatf naq
pbaqvgvba.  V sbhaq zlfrys fvzvyne lrg ng gur fnzr gvzr fgenatryl
hayvxr gb gur orvatf pbapreavat jubz V ernq naq gb jubfr pbairefngvba V
jnf n yvfgrare.  V flzcnguvmrq jvgu naq cnegyl haqrefgbbq gurz, ohg V
jnf hasbezrq va zvaq; V jnf qrcraqrag ba abar naq eryngrq gb abar.
'Gur cngu bs zl qrcnegher jnf serr,' naq gurer jnf abar gb ynzrag zl
naavuvyngvba.  Zl crefba jnf uvqrbhf naq zl fgngher tvtnagvp.  Jung qvq
guvf zrna?  Jub jnf V?  Jung jnf V?  Jurapr qvq V pbzr?  Jung jnf zl
qrfgvangvba?  Gurfr dhrfgvbaf pbagvahnyyl erpheerq, ohg V jnf hanoyr gb
fbyir gurz.

"Gur ibyhzr bs Cyhgnepu'f Yvirf juvpu V cbffrffrq pbagnvarq gur
uvfgbevrf bs gur svefg sbhaqref bs gur napvrag erchoyvpf.  Guvf obbx
unq n sne qvssrerag rssrpg hcba zr sebz gur Fbeebjf bs Jregre.  V
yrnearq sebz Jregre'f vzntvangvbaf qrfcbaqrapl naq tybbz, ohg Cyhgnepu
gnhtug zr uvtu gubhtugf; ur ryringrq zr nobir gur jergpurq fcurer bs zl
bja ersyrpgvbaf, gb nqzver naq ybir gur urebrf bs cnfg ntrf.  Znal
guvatf V ernq fhecnffrq zl haqrefgnaqvat naq rkcrevrapr.  V unq n irel
pbashfrq xabjyrqtr bs xvatqbzf, jvqr rkgragf bs pbhagel, zvtugl eviref,
naq obhaqyrff frnf.  Ohg V jnf cresrpgyl hanpdhnvagrq jvgu gbjaf naq
ynetr nffrzoyntrf bs zra. Gur pbggntr bs zl cebgrpgbef unq orra gur
bayl fpubby va juvpu V unq fghqvrq uhzna angher, ohg guvf obbx
qrirybcrq arj naq zvtugvre fprarf bs npgvba.  V ernq bs zra pbaprearq
va choyvp nssnvef, tbireavat be znffnpevat gurve fcrpvrf.  V sryg gur
terngrfg neqbhe sbe iveghr evfr jvguva zr, naq noubeerapr sbe ivpr, nf
sne nf V haqrefgbbq gur fvtavsvpngvba bs gubfr grezf, eryngvir nf gurl
jrer, nf V nccyvrq gurz, gb cyrnfher naq cnva nybar.  Vaqhprq ol gurfr
srryvatf, V jnf bs pbhefr yrq gb nqzver crnprnoyr ynjtviref, Ahzn,
Fbyba, naq Ylphethf, va cersrerapr gb Ebzhyhf naq Gurfrhf.  Gur
cngevnepuny yvirf bs zl cebgrpgbef pnhfrq gurfr vzcerffvbaf gb gnxr n
svez ubyq ba zl zvaq; creuncf, vs zl svefg vagebqhpgvba gb uhznavgl unq
orra znqr ol n lbhat fbyqvre, oheavat sbe tybel naq fynhtugre, V fubhyq
unir orra vzohrq jvgu qvssrerag frafngvbaf.

"Ohg Cnenqvfr Ybfg rkpvgrq qvssrerag naq sne qrrcre rzbgvbaf.  V ernq
vg, nf V unq ernq gur bgure ibyhzrf juvpu unq snyyra vagb zl unaqf, nf
n gehr uvfgbel.  Vg zbirq rirel srryvat bs jbaqre naq njr gung gur
cvpgher bs na bzavcbgrag Tbq jneevat jvgu uvf perngherf jnf pncnoyr bs
rkpvgvat.  V bsgra ersreerq gur frireny fvghngvbaf, nf gurve fvzvynevgl
fgehpx zr, gb zl bja.  Yvxr Nqnz, V jnf nccneragyl havgrq ol ab yvax gb
nal bgure orvat va rkvfgrapr; ohg uvf fgngr jnf sne qvssrerag sebz zvar
va rirel bgure erfcrpg.  Ur unq pbzr sbegu sebz gur unaqf bs Tbq n
cresrpg perngher, unccl naq cebfcrebhf, thneqrq ol gur rfcrpvny pner bs
uvf Perngbe; ur jnf nyybjrq gb pbairefr jvgu naq npdhver xabjyrqtr sebz
orvatf bs n fhcrevbe angher, ohg V jnf jergpurq, urycyrff, naq nybar.
Znal gvzrf V pbafvqrerq Fngna nf gur svggre rzoyrz bs zl pbaqvgvba, sbe
bsgra, yvxr uvz, jura V ivrjrq gur oyvff bs zl cebgrpgbef, gur ovggre
tnyy bs rail ebfr jvguva zr.

"Nabgure pvephzfgnapr fgeratgurarq naq pbasvezrq gurfr srryvatf.  Fbba
nsgre zl neeviny va gur ubiry V qvfpbirerq fbzr cncref va gur cbpxrg bs
gur qerff juvpu V unq gnxra sebz lbhe ynobengbel.  Ng svefg V unq
artyrpgrq gurz, ohg abj gung V jnf noyr gb qrpvcure gur punenpgref va
juvpu gurl jrer jevggra, V ortna gb fghql gurz jvgu qvyvtrapr.  Vg jnf
lbhe wbheany bs gur sbhe zbaguf gung cerprqrq zl perngvba.  Lbh
zvahgryl qrfpevorq va gurfr cncref rirel fgrc lbh gbbx va gur cebterff
bs lbhe jbex; guvf uvfgbel jnf zvatyrq jvgu nppbhagf bs qbzrfgvp
bppheeraprf.  Lbh qbhogyrff erpbyyrpg gurfr cncref.  Urer gurl ner.
Rirelguvat vf eryngrq va gurz juvpu ornef ersrerapr gb zl npphefrq
bevtva; gur jubyr qrgnvy bs gung frevrf bs qvfthfgvat pvephzfgnaprf
juvpu cebqhprq vg vf frg va ivrj; gur zvahgrfg qrfpevcgvba bs zl bqvbhf
naq ybngufbzr crefba vf tvira, va ynathntr juvpu cnvagrq lbhe bja
ubeebef naq eraqrerq zvar vaqryvoyr.  V fvpxrarq nf V ernq.  'Ungrshy
qnl jura V erprvirq yvsr!' V rkpynvzrq va ntbal.  'Npphefrq perngbe!
Jul qvq lbh sbez n zbafgre fb uvqrbhf gung rira LBH ghearq sebz zr va
qvfthfg?  Tbq, va cvgl, znqr zna ornhgvshy naq nyyhevat, nsgre uvf bja
vzntr; ohg zl sbez vf n svygul glcr bs lbhef, zber ubeevq rira sebz gur
irel erfrzoynapr.  Fngna unq uvf pbzcnavbaf, sryybj qrivyf, gb nqzver
naq rapbhentr uvz, ohg V nz fbyvgnel naq noubeerq.'

"Gurfr jrer gur ersyrpgvbaf bs zl ubhef bs qrfcbaqrapl naq fbyvghqr;
ohg jura V pbagrzcyngrq gur iveghrf bs gur pbggntref, gurve nzvnoyr naq
oraribyrag qvfcbfvgvbaf, V crefhnqrq zlfrys gung jura gurl fubhyq
orpbzr npdhnvagrq jvgu zl nqzvengvba bs gurve iveghrf gurl  jbhyq
pbzcnffvbangr zr naq bireybbx zl crefbany qrsbezvgl.  Pbhyq gurl ghea
sebz gurve qbbe bar, ubjrire zbafgebhf, jub fbyvpvgrq gurve pbzcnffvba
naq sevraqfuvc?  V erfbyirq, ng yrnfg, abg gb qrfcnve, ohg va rirel jnl
gb svg zlfrys sbe na vagreivrj jvgu gurz juvpu jbhyq qrpvqr zl sngr.  V
cbfgcbarq guvf nggrzcg sbe fbzr zbaguf ybatre, sbe gur vzcbegnapr
nggnpurq gb vgf fhpprff vafcverq zr jvgu n qernq yrfg V fubhyq snvy.
Orfvqrf, V sbhaq gung zl haqrefgnaqvat vzcebirq fb zhpu jvgu rirel
qnl'f rkcrevrapr gung V jnf hajvyyvat gb pbzzrapr guvf haqregnxvat
hagvy n srj zber zbaguf fubhyq unir nqqrq gb zl fntnpvgl.

"Frireny punatrf, va gur zrnagvzr, gbbx cynpr va gur pbggntr.  Gur
cerfrapr bs Fnsvr qvsshfrq unccvarff nzbat vgf vaunovgnagf, naq V nyfb
sbhaq gung n terngre qrterr bs cyragl ervtarq gurer.  Sryvk naq Ntngun
fcrag zber gvzr va nzhfrzrag naq pbairefngvba, naq jrer nffvfgrq va
gurve ynobhef ol freinagf.  Gurl qvq abg nccrne evpu, ohg gurl jrer
pbagragrq naq unccl; gurve srryvatf jrer frerar naq crnprshy, juvyr
zvar orpnzr rirel qnl zber ghzhyghbhf.  Vapernfr bs xabjyrqtr bayl
qvfpbirerq gb zr zber pyrneyl jung n jergpurq bhgpnfg V jnf.  V
purevfurq ubcr, vg vf gehr, ohg vg inavfurq jura V oruryq zl crefba
ersyrpgrq va jngre be zl funqbj va gur zbbafuvar, rira nf gung senvy
vzntr naq gung vapbafgnag funqr.

"V raqrnibherq gb pehfu gurfr srnef naq gb sbegvsl zlfrys sbe gur gevny
juvpu va n srj zbaguf V erfbyirq gb haqretb; naq fbzrgvzrf V nyybjrq zl
gubhtugf, hapurpxrq ol ernfba, gb enzoyr va gur svryqf bs Cnenqvfr, naq
qnerq gb snapl nzvnoyr naq ybiryl perngherf flzcnguvmvat jvgu zl
srryvatf naq purrevat zl tybbz; gurve natryvp pbhagranaprf oerngurq
fzvyrf bs pbafbyngvba.  Ohg vg jnf nyy n qernz; ab Rir fbbgurq zl
fbeebjf abe funerq zl gubhtugf; V jnf nybar.  V erzrzorerq Nqnz'f
fhccyvpngvba gb uvf Perngbe.  Ohg jurer jnf zvar?  Ur unq nonaqbarq zr,
naq va gur ovggrearff bs zl urneg V phefrq uvz.

"Nhghza cnffrq guhf.  V fnj, jvgu fhecevfr naq tevrs, gur yrnirf qrpnl
naq snyy, naq angher ntnva nffhzr gur oneera naq oyrnx nccrnenapr vg
unq jbea jura V svefg oruryq gur jbbqf naq gur ybiryl zbba.  Lrg V qvq
abg urrq gur oyrnxarff bs gur jrngure; V jnf orggre svggrq ol zl
pbasbezngvba sbe gur raqhenapr bs pbyq guna urng.  Ohg zl puvrs
qryvtugf jrer gur fvtug bs gur sybjref, gur oveqf, naq nyy gur tnl
nccnery bs fhzzre; jura gubfr qrfregrq zr, V ghearq jvgu zber nggragvba
gbjneqf gur pbggntref.  Gurve unccvarff jnf abg qrpernfrq ol gur
nofrapr bs fhzzre.  Gurl ybirq naq flzcnguvmrq jvgu bar nabgure; naq
gurve wblf, qrcraqvat ba rnpu bgure, jrer abg vagreehcgrq ol gur
pnfhnygvrf gung gbbx cynpr nebhaq gurz.  Gur zber V fnj bs gurz, gur
terngre orpnzr zl qrfver gb pynvz gurve cebgrpgvba naq xvaqarff; zl
urneg lrnearq gb or xabja naq ybirq ol gurfr nzvnoyr perngherf; gb frr
gurve fjrrg ybbxf qverpgrq gbjneqf zr jvgu nssrpgvba jnf gur hgzbfg
yvzvg bs zl nzovgvba.  V qnerq abg guvax gung gurl jbhyq ghea gurz sebz
zr jvgu qvfqnva naq ubeebe.  Gur cbbe gung fgbccrq ng gurve qbbe jrer
arire qevira njnl.  V nfxrq, vg vf gehr, sbe terngre gernfherf guna n
yvggyr sbbq be erfg:  V erdhverq xvaqarff naq flzcngul; ohg V qvq abg
oryvrir zlfrys hggreyl hajbegul bs vg.

"Gur jvagre nqinaprq, naq na ragver eribyhgvba bs gur frnfbaf unq gnxra
cynpr fvapr V njbxr vagb yvsr.  Zl nggragvba ng guvf gvzr jnf fbyryl
qverpgrq gbjneqf zl cyna bs vagebqhpvat zlfrys vagb gur pbggntr bs zl
cebgrpgbef.  V eribyirq znal cebwrpgf, ohg gung ba juvpu V svanyyl
svkrq jnf gb ragre gur qjryyvat jura gur oyvaq byq zna fubhyq or nybar.
V unq fntnpvgl rabhtu gb qvfpbire gung gur haangheny uvqrbhfarff bs zl
crefba jnf gur puvrs bowrpg bs ubeebe jvgu gubfr jub unq sbezreyl
oruryq zr.  Zl ibvpr, nygubhtu unefu, unq abguvat greevoyr va vg; V
gubhtug, gurersber, gung vs va gur nofrapr bs uvf puvyqera V pbhyq tnva
gur tbbq jvyy naq zrqvngvba bs gur byq Qr Ynprl, V zvtug ol uvf zrnaf
or gbyrengrq ol zl lbhatre cebgrpgbef.

"Bar qnl, jura gur fha fubar ba gur erq yrnirf gung fgerjrq gur tebhaq
naq qvsshfrq purreshyarff, nygubhtu vg qravrq jnezgu, Fnsvr, Ntngun,
naq Sryvk qrcnegrq ba n ybat pbhagel jnyx, naq gur byq zna, ng uvf bja
qrfver, jnf yrsg nybar va gur pbggntr.  Jura uvf puvyqera unq qrcnegrq,
ur gbbx hc uvf thvgne naq cynlrq frireny zbheashy ohg fjrrg nvef, zber
fjrrg naq zbheashy guna V unq rire urneq uvz cynl orsber.  Ng svefg uvf
pbhagranapr jnf vyyhzvangrq jvgu cyrnfher, ohg nf ur pbagvahrq,
gubhtugshyarff naq fnqarff fhpprrqrq; ng yratgu, ynlvat nfvqr gur
vafgehzrag, ur fng nofbeorq va ersyrpgvba.

"Zl urneg orng dhvpx; guvf jnf gur ubhe naq zbzrag bs gevny, juvpu
jbhyq qrpvqr zl ubcrf be ernyvmr zl srnef.  Gur freinagf jrer tbar gb n
arvtuobhevat snve.  Nyy jnf fvyrag va naq nebhaq gur pbggntr; vg jnf na
rkpryyrag bccbeghavgl; lrg, jura V cebprrqrq gb rkrphgr zl cyna, zl
yvzof snvyrq zr naq V fnax gb gur tebhaq.  Ntnva V ebfr, naq rkregvat
nyy gur svezarff bs juvpu V jnf znfgre, erzbirq gur cynaxf juvpu V unq
cynprq orsber zl ubiry gb pbaprny zl ergerng.  Gur serfu nve erivirq
zr, naq jvgu erarjrq qrgrezvangvba V nccebnpurq gur qbbe bs gurve
pbggntr.

"V xabpxrq.  'Jub vf gurer?' fnvq gur byq zna.  'Pbzr va.'

"V ragrerq.  'Cneqba guvf vagehfvba,' fnvq V; 'V nz n geniryyre va jnag
bs n yvggyr erfg; lbh jbhyq terngyl boyvtr zr vs lbh jbhyq nyybj zr gb
erznva n srj zvahgrf orsber gur sver.'

"'Ragre,' fnvq Qr Ynprl, 'naq V jvyy gel va jung znaare V pna gb
eryvrir lbhe jnagf; ohg, hasbeghangryl, zl puvyqera ner sebz ubzr, naq
nf V nz oyvaq, V nz nsenvq V funyy svaq vg qvssvphyg gb cebpher sbbq
sbe lbh.'

"'Qb abg gebhoyr lbhefrys, zl xvaq ubfg; V unir sbbq; vg vf jnezgu naq
erfg bayl gung V arrq.'

"V fng qbja, naq n fvyrapr rafhrq.  V xarj gung rirel zvahgr jnf
cerpvbhf gb zr, lrg V erznvarq veerfbyhgr va jung znaare gb pbzzrapr
gur vagreivrj, jura gur byq zna nqqerffrq zr.  'Ol lbhe ynathntr,
fgenatre, V fhccbfr lbh ner zl pbhagelzna; ner lbh Serapu?'

"'Ab; ohg V jnf rqhpngrq ol n Serapu snzvyl naq haqrefgnaq gung
ynathntr bayl.  V nz abj tbvat gb pynvz gur cebgrpgvba bs fbzr sevraqf,
jubz V fvapreryl ybir, naq bs jubfr snibhe V unir fbzr ubcrf.'

"'Ner gurl Treznaf?'

"'Ab, gurl ner Serapu.  Ohg yrg hf punatr gur fhowrpg.  V nz na
hasbeghangr naq qrfregrq perngher, V ybbx nebhaq naq V unir ab eryngvba
be sevraq hcba rnegu.  Gurfr nzvnoyr crbcyr gb jubz V tb unir arire
frra zr naq xabj yvggyr bs zr.  V nz shyy bs srnef, sbe vs V snvy
gurer, V nz na bhgpnfg va gur jbeyq sberire.'

"'Qb abg qrfcnve.  Gb or sevraqyrff vf vaqrrq gb or hasbeghangr, ohg
gur urnegf bs zra, jura hacerwhqvprq ol nal boivbhf frys-vagrerfg, ner
shyy bs oebgureyl ybir naq punevgl.  Eryl, gurersber, ba lbhe ubcrf;
naq vs gurfr sevraqf ner tbbq naq nzvnoyr, qb abg qrfcnve.'

"'Gurl ner xvaq--gurl ner gur zbfg rkpryyrag perngherf va gur jbeyq;
ohg, hasbeghangryl, gurl ner cerwhqvprq ntnvafg zr.  V unir tbbq
qvfcbfvgvbaf; zl yvsr unf orra uvguregb unezyrff naq va fbzr qrterr
orarsvpvny; ohg n sngny cerwhqvpr pybhqf gurve rlrf, naq jurer gurl
bhtug gb frr n srryvat naq xvaq sevraq, gurl orubyq bayl n qrgrfgnoyr
zbafgre.'

"'Gung vf vaqrrq hasbeghangr; ohg vs lbh ner ernyyl oynzryrff, pnaabg
lbh haqrprvir gurz?'

"'V nz nobhg gb haqregnxr gung gnfx; naq vg vf ba gung nppbhag gung V
srry fb znal birejuryzvat greebef.  V graqreyl ybir gurfr sevraqf; V
unir, haxabja gb gurz, orra sbe znal zbaguf va gur unovgf bs qnvyl
xvaqarff gbjneqf gurz; ohg gurl oryvrir gung V jvfu gb vawher gurz, naq
vg vf gung cerwhqvpr juvpu V jvfu gb birepbzr.'

"'Jurer qb gurfr sevraqf erfvqr?'

"'Arne guvf fcbg.'

"Gur byq zna cnhfrq naq gura pbagvahrq, 'Vs lbh jvyy haerfreirqyl
pbasvqr gb zr gur cnegvphynef bs lbhe gnyr, V creuncf znl or bs hfr va
haqrprvivat gurz.  V nz oyvaq naq pnaabg whqtr bs lbhe pbhagranapr, ohg
gurer vf fbzrguvat va lbhe jbeqf juvpu crefhnqrf zr gung lbh ner
fvaprer.  V nz cbbe naq na rkvyr, ohg vg jvyy nssbeq zr gehr cyrnfher
gb or va nal jnl freivprnoyr gb n uhzna perngher.'

"'Rkpryyrag zna!  V gunax lbh naq npprcg lbhe trarebhf bssre.  Lbh
envfr zr sebz gur qhfg ol guvf xvaqarff; naq V gehfg gung, ol lbhe nvq,
V funyy abg or qevira sebz gur fbpvrgl naq flzcngul bs lbhe sryybj
perngherf.'

"'Urnira sbeovq!  Rira vs lbh jrer ernyyl pevzvany, sbe gung pna bayl
qevir lbh gb qrfcrengvba, naq abg vafgvtngr lbh gb iveghr.  V nyfb nz
hasbeghangr; V naq zl snzvyl unir orra pbaqrzarq, nygubhtu vaabprag;
whqtr, gurersber, vs V qb abg srry sbe lbhe zvfsbegharf.'

"'Ubj pna V gunax lbh, zl orfg naq bayl orarsnpgbe?  Sebz lbhe yvcf
svefg unir V urneq gur ibvpr bs xvaqarff qverpgrq gbjneqf zr; V funyy
or sberire tengrshy; naq lbhe cerfrag uhznavgl nffherf zr bs fhpprff
jvgu gubfr sevraqf jubz V nz ba gur cbvag bs zrrgvat.'

"'Znl V xabj gur anzrf naq erfvqrapr bs gubfr sevraqf?'

"V cnhfrq. Guvf, V gubhtug, jnf gur zbzrag bs qrpvfvba, juvpu jnf gb
ebo zr bs be orfgbj unccvarff ba zr sberire.  V fgehttyrq invayl sbe
svezarff fhssvpvrag gb nafjre uvz, ohg gur rssbeg qrfgeblrq nyy zl
erznvavat fgeratgu; V fnax ba gur punve naq fboorq nybhq.  Ng gung
zbzrag V urneq gur fgrcf bs zl lbhatre cebgrpgbef.  V unq abg n zbzrag
gb ybfr, ohg frvmvat gur unaq bs gur byq zna, V pevrq, 'Abj vf gur
gvzr!  Fnir naq cebgrpg zr!  Lbh naq lbhe snzvyl ner gur sevraqf jubz V
frrx.  Qb abg lbh qrfreg zr va gur ubhe bs gevny!'

"'Terng Tbq!' rkpynvzrq gur byq zna.  'Jub ner lbh?'

"Ng gung vafgnag gur pbggntr qbbe jnf bcrarq, naq Sryvk, Fnsvr, naq
Ntngun ragrerq.  Jub pna qrfpevor gurve ubeebe naq pbafgreangvba ba
orubyqvat zr?  Ntngun snvagrq, naq Fnsvr, hanoyr gb nggraq gb ure
sevraq, ehfurq bhg bs gur pbggntr.  Sryvk qnegrq sbejneq, naq jvgu
fhcreangheny sbepr gber zr sebz uvf sngure, gb jubfr xarrf V pyhat, va
n genafcbeg bs shel, ur qnfurq zr gb gur tebhaq naq fgehpx zr ivbyragyl
jvgu n fgvpx.  V pbhyq unir gbea uvz yvzo sebz yvzo, nf gur yvba eraqf
gur nagrybcr.  Ohg zl urneg fnax jvguva zr nf jvgu ovggre fvpxarff, naq
V ersenvarq.  V fnj uvz ba gur cbvag bs ercrngvat uvf oybj, jura,
birepbzr ol cnva naq nathvfu, V dhvggrq gur pbggntr, naq va gur trareny
ghzhyg rfpncrq hacreprvirq gb zl ubiry."



Puncgre 16

"Phefrq, phefrq perngbe!  Jul qvq V yvir?  Jul, va gung vafgnag, qvq V
abg rkgvathvfu gur fcnex bs rkvfgrapr juvpu lbh unq fb jnagbayl
orfgbjrq?  V xabj abg; qrfcnve unq abg lrg gnxra cbffrffvba bs zr; zl
srryvatf jrer gubfr bs entr naq eriratr.  V pbhyq jvgu cyrnfher unir
qrfgeblrq gur pbggntr naq vgf vaunovgnagf naq unir tyhggrq zlfrys jvgu
gurve fuevrxf naq zvfrel.

"Jura avtug pnzr V dhvggrq zl ergerng naq jnaqrerq va gur jbbq; naq
abj, ab ybatre erfgenvarq ol gur srne bs qvfpbirel, V tnir irag gb zl
nathvfu va srneshy ubjyvatf.  V jnf yvxr n jvyq ornfg gung unq oebxra
gur gbvyf, qrfgeblvat gur bowrpgf gung bofgehpgrq zr naq enatvat
guebhtu gur jbbq jvgu n fgnt-yvxr fjvsgarff.  Bu!  Jung n zvfrenoyr
avtug V cnffrq!  Gur pbyq fgnef fubar va zbpxrel, naq gur oner gerrf
jnirq gurve oenapurf nobir zr; abj naq gura gur fjrrg ibvpr bs n oveq
ohefg sbegu nzvqfg gur havirefny fgvyyarff.  Nyy, fnir V, jrer ng erfg
be va rawblzrag; V, yvxr gur nepu-svraq, ober n uryy jvguva zr, naq
svaqvat zlfrys haflzcnguvmrq jvgu, jvfurq gb grne hc gur gerrf, fcernq
unibp naq qrfgehpgvba nebhaq zr, naq gura gb unir fng qbja naq rawblrq
gur ehva.

"Ohg guvf jnf n yhkhel bs frafngvba gung pbhyq abg raqher; V orpnzr
sngvthrq jvgu rkprff bs obqvyl rkregvba naq fnax ba gur qnzc tenff va
gur fvpx vzcbgrapr bs qrfcnve.  Gurer jnf abar nzbat gur zlevnqf bs zra
gung rkvfgrq jub jbhyq cvgl be nffvfg zr; naq fubhyq V srry xvaqarff
gbjneqf zl rarzvrf?  Ab; sebz gung zbzrag V qrpynerq rireynfgvat jne
ntnvafg gur fcrpvrf, naq zber guna nyy, ntnvafg uvz jub unq sbezrq zr
naq frag zr sbegu gb guvf vafhccbegnoyr zvfrel.

"Gur fha ebfr; V urneq gur ibvprf bs zra naq xarj gung vg jnf
vzcbffvoyr gb erghea gb zl ergerng qhevat gung qnl.  Nppbeqvatyl V uvq
zlfrys va fbzr guvpx haqrejbbq, qrgrezvavat gb qribgr gur rafhvat ubhef
gb ersyrpgvba ba zl fvghngvba.

"Gur cyrnfnag fhafuvar naq gur cher nve bs qnl erfgberq zr gb fbzr
qrterr bs genadhvyyvgl; naq jura V pbafvqrerq jung unq cnffrq ng gur
pbggntr, V pbhyq abg uryc oryvrivat gung V unq orra gbb unfgl va zl
pbapyhfvbaf.  V unq pregnvayl npgrq vzcehqragyl.  Vg jnf nccnerag gung
zl pbairefngvba unq vagrerfgrq gur sngure va zl orunys, naq  V jnf n
sbby va univat rkcbfrq zl crefba gb gur ubeebe bs uvf puvyqera.  V
bhtug gb unir snzvyvnevmrq gur byq Qr Ynprl gb zr, naq ol qrterrf gb
unir qvfpbirerq zlfrys gb gur erfg bs uvf snzvyl, jura gurl fubhyq unir
orra  cercnerq sbe zl nccebnpu.  Ohg V qvq abg oryvrir zl reebef gb or
veergevrinoyr, naq nsgre zhpu pbafvqrengvba V erfbyirq gb erghea gb gur
pbggntr, frrx gur byq zna, naq ol zl ercerfragngvbaf jva uvz gb zl
cnegl.

"Gurfr gubhtugf pnyzrq zr, naq va gur nsgreabba V fnax vagb n cebsbhaq
fyrrc; ohg gur srire bs zl oybbq qvq abg nyybj zr gb or ivfvgrq ol
crnprshy qernzf.  Gur ubeevoyr fprar bs gur cerprqvat qnl jnf sberire
npgvat orsber zl rlrf; gur srznyrf jrer sylvat naq gur raentrq Sryvk
grnevat zr sebz uvf sngure'f srrg.  V njbxr rkunhfgrq, naq svaqvat gung
vg jnf nyernql avtug, V percg sbegu sebz zl uvqvat-cynpr, naq jrag va
frnepu bs sbbq.

"Jura zl uhatre jnf nccrnfrq, V qverpgrq zl fgrcf gbjneqf gur
jryy-xabja cngu gung pbaqhpgrq gb gur pbggntr.  Nyy gurer jnf ng crnpr.
V percg vagb zl ubiry naq erznvarq va fvyrag rkcrpgngvba bs gur
npphfgbzrq ubhe jura gur snzvyl nebfr.  Gung ubhe cnffrq, gur fha
zbhagrq uvtu va gur urniraf, ohg gur pbggntref qvq abg nccrne.  V
gerzoyrq ivbyragyl, ncceruraqvat fbzr qernqshy zvfsbeghar.  Gur vafvqr
bs gur pbggntr jnf qnex, naq V urneq ab zbgvba; V pnaabg qrfpevor gur
ntbal bs guvf fhfcrafr.

"Cerfragyl gjb pbhagelzra cnffrq ol, ohg cnhfvat arne gur pbggntr, gurl
ragrerq vagb pbairefngvba, hfvat ivbyrag trfgvphyngvbaf; ohg V qvq abg
haqrefgnaq jung gurl fnvq, nf gurl fcbxr gur ynathntr bs gur pbhagel,
juvpu qvssrerq sebz gung bs zl cebgrpgbef.  Fbba nsgre, ubjrire, Sryvk
nccebnpurq jvgu nabgure zna; V jnf fhecevfrq, nf V xarj gung ur unq abg
dhvggrq gur pbggntr gung zbeavat, naq jnvgrq nakvbhfyl gb qvfpbire sebz
uvf qvfpbhefr gur zrnavat bs gurfr hahfhny nccrnenaprf.

"'Qb lbh pbafvqre,' fnvq uvf pbzcnavba gb uvz, 'gung lbh jvyy or
boyvtrq gb cnl guerr zbaguf' erag naq gb ybfr gur cebqhpr bs lbhe
tneqra?  V qb abg jvfu gb gnxr nal hasnve nqinagntr, naq V ort
gurersber gung lbh jvyy gnxr fbzr qnlf gb pbafvqre bs lbhe
qrgrezvangvba.'

"'Vg vf hggreyl hfryrff,' ercyvrq Sryvk; 'jr pna arire ntnva vaunovg
lbhe pbggntr.  Gur yvsr bs zl sngure vf va gur terngrfg qnatre, bjvat
gb gur qernqshy pvephzfgnapr gung V unir eryngrq.  Zl jvsr naq zl
fvfgre jvyy arire erpbire sebz gurve ubeebe.  V ragerng lbh abg gb
ernfba jvgu zr nal zber.  Gnxr cbffrffvba bs lbhe grarzrag naq yrg zr
syl sebz guvf cynpr.'

"Sryvk gerzoyrq ivbyragyl nf ur fnvq guvf.  Ur naq uvf pbzcnavba
ragrerq gur pbggntr, va juvpu gurl erznvarq sbe n srj zvahgrf, naq gura
qrcnegrq.  V arire fnj nal bs gur snzvyl bs Qr Ynprl zber.

"V pbagvahrq sbe gur erznvaqre bs gur qnl va zl ubiry va n fgngr bs
hggre naq fghcvq qrfcnve.  Zl cebgrpgbef unq qrcnegrq naq unq oebxra
gur bayl yvax gung uryq zr gb gur jbeyq.  Sbe gur svefg gvzr gur
srryvatf bs eriratr naq ungerq svyyrq zl obfbz, naq V qvq abg fgevir gb
pbageby gurz, ohg nyybjvat zlfrys gb or obear njnl ol gur fgernz, V
orag zl zvaq gbjneqf vawhel naq qrngu.  Jura V gubhtug bs zl sevraqf,
bs gur zvyq ibvpr bs Qr Ynprl, gur tragyr rlrf bs Ntngun, naq gur
rkdhvfvgr ornhgl bs gur Nenovna, gurfr gubhtugf inavfurq naq n thfu bs
grnef fbzrjung fbbgurq zr.  Ohg ntnva jura V ersyrpgrq gung gurl unq
fchearq naq qrfregrq zr, natre erghearq, n entr bs natre, naq hanoyr gb
vawher nalguvat uhzna, V ghearq zl shel gbjneqf vanavzngr bowrpgf.  Nf
avtug nqinaprq V cynprq n inevrgl bs pbzohfgvoyrf nebhaq gur pbggntr,
naq nsgre univat qrfgeblrq rirel irfgvtr bs phygvingvba va gur tneqra,
V jnvgrq jvgu sbeprq vzcngvrapr hagvy gur zbba unq fhax gb pbzzrapr zl
bcrengvbaf.

"Nf gur avtug nqinaprq, n svrepr jvaq nebfr sebz gur jbbqf naq dhvpxyl
qvfcrefrq gur pybhqf gung unq ybvgrerq va gur urniraf; gur oynfg gber
nybat yvxr n zvtugl ninynapur naq cebqhprq n xvaq bs vafnavgl va zl
fcvevgf gung ohefg nyy obhaqf bs ernfba naq ersyrpgvba.  V yvtugrq gur
qel oenapu bs n gerr naq qnaprq jvgu shel nebhaq gur qribgrq pbggntr,
zl rlrf fgvyy svkrq ba gur jrfgrea ubevmba, gur rqtr bs juvpu gur zbba
arneyl gbhpurq.  N cneg bs vgf beo jnf ng yratgu uvq, naq V jnirq zl
oenaq; vg fnax, naq jvgu n ybhq fpernz V sverq gur fgenj, naq urngu,
naq ohfurf, juvpu V unq pbyyrpgrq.  Gur jvaq snaarq gur sver, naq gur
pbggntr jnf dhvpxyl rairybcrq ol gur synzrf, juvpu pyhat gb vg naq
yvpxrq vg jvgu gurve sbexrq naq qrfgeblvat gbathrf.

"Nf fbba nf V jnf pbaivaprq gung ab nffvfgnapr pbhyq fnir nal cneg bs
gur unovgngvba, V dhvggrq gur fprar naq fbhtug sbe ershtr va gur jbbqf.

"Naq abj, jvgu gur jbeyq orsber zr, juvgure fubhyq V oraq zl fgrcf?  V
erfbyirq gb syl sne sebz gur fprar bs zl zvfsbegharf; ohg gb zr, ungrq
naq qrfcvfrq, rirel pbhagel zhfg or rdhnyyl ubeevoyr.  Ng yratgu gur
gubhtug bs lbh pebffrq zl zvaq.  V yrnearq sebz lbhe cncref gung lbh
jrer zl sngure, zl perngbe; naq gb jubz pbhyq V nccyl jvgu zber svgarff
guna gb uvz jub unq tvira zr yvsr?  Nzbat gur yrffbaf gung Sryvk unq
orfgbjrq hcba Fnsvr, trbtencul unq abg orra bzvggrq; V unq yrnearq sebz
gurfr gur eryngvir fvghngvbaf bs gur qvssrerag pbhagevrf bs gur rnegu.
Lbh unq zragvbarq Trarin nf gur anzr bs lbhe angvir gbja, naq gbjneqf
guvf cynpr V erfbyirq gb cebprrq.

"Ohg ubj jnf V gb qverpg zlfrys?  V xarj gung V zhfg geniry va n
fbhgujrfgreyl qverpgvba gb ernpu zl qrfgvangvba, ohg gur fha jnf zl
bayl thvqr.  V qvq abg xabj gur anzrf bs gur gbjaf gung V jnf gb cnff
guebhtu, abe pbhyq V nfx vasbezngvba sebz n fvatyr uhzna orvat; ohg V
qvq abg qrfcnve.  Sebz lbh bayl pbhyq V ubcr sbe fhppbhe, nygubhtu
gbjneqf lbh V sryg ab fragvzrag ohg gung bs ungerq.  Hasrryvat,
urnegyrff perngbe!  Lbh unq raqbjrq zr jvgu creprcgvbaf naq cnffvbaf
naq gura pnfg zr noebnq na bowrpg sbe gur fpbea naq ubeebe bs znaxvaq.
Ohg ba lbh bayl unq V nal pynvz sbe cvgl naq erqerff, naq sebz lbh V
qrgrezvarq gb frrx gung whfgvpr juvpu V invayl nggrzcgrq gb tnva sebz
nal bgure orvat gung jber gur uhzna sbez.

"Zl geniryf jrer ybat naq gur fhssrevatf V raqherq vagrafr.  Vg jnf
yngr va nhghza jura V dhvggrq gur qvfgevpg jurer V unq fb ybat erfvqrq.
V geniryyrq bayl ng avtug, srneshy bs rapbhagrevat gur ivfntr bs n
uhzna orvat.  Angher qrpnlrq nebhaq zr, naq gur fha orpnzr urngyrff;
enva naq fabj cbherq nebhaq zr; zvtugl eviref jrer sebmra; gur fhesnpr
bs gur rnegu jnf uneq naq puvyy, naq oner, naq V sbhaq ab furygre.  Bu,
rnegu!  Ubj bsgra qvq V vzcerpngr phefrf ba gur pnhfr bs zl orvat!  Gur
zvyqarff bs zl angher unq syrq, naq nyy jvguva zr jnf ghearq gb tnyy
naq ovggrearff.  Gur arnere V nccebnpurq gb lbhe unovgngvba, gur zber
qrrcyl qvq V srry gur fcvevg bs eriratr raxvaqyrq va zl urneg.  Fabj
sryy, naq gur jngref jrer uneqrarq, ohg V erfgrq abg.  N srj vapvqragf
abj naq gura qverpgrq zr, naq V cbffrffrq n znc bs gur pbhagel; ohg V
bsgra jnaqrerq jvqr sebz zl cngu.  Gur ntbal bs zl srryvatf nyybjrq zr
ab erfcvgr; ab vapvqrag bppheerq sebz juvpu zl entr naq zvfrel pbhyq
abg rkgenpg vgf sbbq; ohg n pvephzfgnapr gung unccrarq jura V neevirq
ba gur pbasvarf bs Fjvgmreynaq, jura gur fha unq erpbirerq vgf jnezgu
naq gur rnegu ntnva ortna gb ybbx terra, pbasvezrq va na rfcrpvny
znaare gur ovggrearff naq ubeebe bs zl srryvatf.

"V trarenyyl erfgrq qhevat gur qnl naq geniryyrq bayl jura V jnf
frpherq ol avtug sebz gur ivrj bs zna.  Bar zbeavat, ubjrire, svaqvat
gung zl cngu ynl guebhtu n qrrc jbbq, V iragherq gb pbagvahr zl wbhearl
nsgre gur fha unq evfra; gur qnl, juvpu jnf bar bs gur svefg bs fcevat,
purrerq rira zr ol gur ybiryvarff bs vgf fhafuvar naq gur onyzvarff bs
gur nve.  V sryg rzbgvbaf bs tragyrarff naq cyrnfher, gung unq ybat
nccrnerq qrnq, erivir jvguva zr.  Unys fhecevfrq ol gur abirygl bs
gurfr frafngvbaf, V nyybjrq zlfrys gb or obear njnl ol gurz, naq
sbetrggvat zl fbyvghqr naq qrsbezvgl, qnerq gb or unccl.  Fbsg grnef
ntnva orqrjrq zl purrxf, naq V rira envfrq zl uhzvq rlrf jvgu
gunaxshyarff gbjneqf gur oyrffrq fha, juvpu orfgbjrq fhpu wbl hcba zr.

"V pbagvahrq gb jvaq nzbat gur cnguf bs gur jbbq, hagvy V pnzr gb vgf
obhaqnel, juvpu jnf fxvegrq ol n qrrc naq encvq evire, vagb juvpu znal
bs gur gerrf orag gurve oenapurf, abj ohqqvat jvgu gur serfu fcevat.
Urer V cnhfrq, abg rknpgyl xabjvat jung cngu gb chefhr, jura V urneq
gur fbhaq bs ibvprf, gung vaqhprq zr gb pbaprny zlfrys haqre gur funqr
bs n plcerff.  V jnf fpnepryl uvq jura n lbhat tvey pnzr ehaavat
gbjneqf gur fcbg jurer V jnf pbaprnyrq, ynhtuvat, nf vs fur ena sebz
fbzrbar va fcbeg.  Fur pbagvahrq ure pbhefr nybat gur cerpvcvgbhf fvqrf
bs gur evire, jura fhqqrayl ure sbbg fyvccrq, naq fur sryy vagb gur
encvq fgernz.  V ehfurq sebz zl uvqvat-cynpr naq jvgu rkgerzr ynobhe,
sebz gur sbepr bs gur pheerag, fnirq ure naq qenttrq ure gb fuber.  Fur
jnf frafryrff, naq V raqrnibherq ol rirel zrnaf va zl cbjre gb erfgber
navzngvba, jura V jnf fhqqrayl vagreehcgrq ol gur nccebnpu bs n ehfgvp,
jub jnf cebonoyl gur crefba sebz jubz fur unq cynlshyyl syrq.  Ba
frrvat zr, ur qnegrq gbjneqf zr, naq grnevat gur tvey sebz zl nezf,
unfgrarq gbjneqf gur qrrcre cnegf bs gur jbbq.  V sbyybjrq fcrrqvyl, V
uneqyl xarj jul; ohg jura gur zna fnj zr qenj arne, ur nvzrq n tha,
juvpu ur pneevrq, ng zl obql naq sverq.  V fnax gb gur tebhaq, naq zl
vawhere, jvgu vapernfrq fjvsgarff, rfpncrq vagb gur jbbq.

"Guvf jnf gura gur erjneq bs zl oraribyrapr!  V unq fnirq n uhzna orvat
sebz qrfgehpgvba, naq nf n erpbzcrafr V abj jevgurq haqre gur zvfrenoyr
cnva bs n jbhaq juvpu funggrerq gur syrfu naq obar.  Gur srryvatf bs
xvaqarff naq tragyrarff juvpu V unq ragregnvarq ohg n srj zbzragf
orsber tnir cynpr gb uryyvfu entr naq tanfuvat bs grrgu.  Vasynzrq ol
cnva, V ibjrq rgreany ungerq naq iratrnapr gb nyy znaxvaq.  Ohg gur
ntbal bs zl jbhaq birepnzr zr; zl chyfrf cnhfrq, naq V snvagrq.

"Sbe fbzr jrrxf V yrq n zvfrenoyr yvsr va gur jbbqf, raqrnibhevat gb
pher gur jbhaq juvpu V unq erprvirq.  Gur onyy unq ragrerq zl fubhyqre,
naq V xarj abg jurgure vg unq erznvarq gurer be cnffrq guebhtu; ng nal
engr V unq ab zrnaf bs rkgenpgvat vg.  Zl fhssrevatf jrer nhtzragrq
nyfb ol gur bccerffvir frafr bs gur vawhfgvpr naq vatengvghqr bs gurve
vasyvpgvba.  Zl qnvyl ibjf ebfr sbe eriratr--n qrrc naq qrnqyl eriratr,
fhpu nf jbhyq nybar pbzcrafngr sbe gur bhgentrf naq nathvfu V unq
raqherq.

"Nsgre fbzr jrrxf zl jbhaq urnyrq, naq V pbagvahrq zl wbhearl.  Gur
ynobhef V raqherq jrer ab ybatre gb or nyyrivngrq ol gur oevtug fha be
tragyr oerrmrf bs fcevat; nyy wbl jnf ohg n zbpxrel juvpu vafhygrq zl
qrfbyngr fgngr naq znqr zr srry zber cnvashyyl gung V jnf abg znqr sbe
gur rawblzrag bs cyrnfher.

"Ohg zl gbvyf abj qerj arne n pybfr, naq va gjb zbaguf sebz guvf gvzr V
ernpurq gur raivebaf bs Trarin.

"Vg jnf riravat jura V neevirq, naq V ergverq gb n uvqvat-cynpr nzbat
gur svryqf gung fheebhaq vg gb zrqvgngr va jung znaare V fubhyq nccyl
gb lbh.  V jnf bccerffrq ol sngvthr naq uhatre naq sne gbb haunccl gb
rawbl gur tragyr oerrmrf bs riravat be gur cebfcrpg bs gur fha frggvat
oruvaq gur fghcraqbhf zbhagnvaf bs When.

"Ng guvf gvzr n fyvtug fyrrc eryvrirq zr sebz gur cnva bs ersyrpgvba,
juvpu jnf qvfgheorq ol gur nccebnpu bs n ornhgvshy puvyq, jub pnzr
ehaavat vagb gur erprff V unq pubfra, jvgu nyy gur fcbegvirarff bs
vasnapl.  Fhqqrayl, nf V tnmrq ba uvz, na vqrn frvmrq zr gung guvf
yvggyr perngher jnf hacerwhqvprq naq unq yvirq gbb fubeg n gvzr gb unir
vzovorq n ubeebe bs qrsbezvgl.  Vs, gurersber, V pbhyq frvmr uvz naq
rqhpngr uvz nf zl pbzcnavba naq sevraq, V fubhyq abg or fb qrfbyngr va
guvf crbcyrq rnegu.

"Hetrq ol guvf vzchyfr, V frvmrq ba gur obl nf ur cnffrq naq qerj uvz
gbjneqf zr.  Nf fbba nf ur oruryq zl sbez, ur cynprq uvf unaqf orsber
uvf rlrf naq hggrerq n fuevyy fpernz; V qerj uvf unaq sbepvoyl sebz uvf
snpr naq fnvq, 'Puvyq, jung vf gur zrnavat bs guvf?  V qb abg vagraq gb
uheg lbh; yvfgra gb zr.'

"Ur fgehttyrq ivbyragyl.  'Yrg zr tb,' ur pevrq; 'zbafgre!  Htyl
jergpu!  Lbh jvfu gb rng zr naq grne zr gb cvrprf.  Lbh ner na bter.
Yrg zr tb, be V jvyy gryy zl cncn.'

"'Obl, lbh jvyy arire frr lbhe sngure ntnva; lbh zhfg pbzr jvgu zr.'

"'Uvqrbhf zbafgre!  Yrg zr tb.  Zl cncn vf n flaqvp--ur vf Z.
Senaxrafgrva--ur jvyy chavfu lbh.  Lbh qner abg xrrc zr.'

"'Senaxrafgrva! lbh orybat gura gb zl rarzl--gb uvz gbjneqf jubz V unir
fjbea rgreany eriratr; lbh funyy or zl svefg ivpgvz.'

"Gur puvyq fgvyy fgehttyrq naq ybnqrq zr jvgu rcvgurgf juvpu pneevrq
qrfcnve gb zl urneg; V tenfcrq uvf guebng gb fvyrapr uvz, naq va n
zbzrag ur ynl qrnq ng zl srrg.

"V tnmrq ba zl ivpgvz, naq zl urneg fjryyrq jvgu rkhygngvba naq uryyvfu
gevhzcu; pynccvat zl unaqf, V rkpynvzrq, 'V gbb pna perngr qrfbyngvba;
zl rarzl vf abg vaihyarenoyr; guvf qrngu jvyy pneel qrfcnve gb uvz, naq
n gubhfnaq bgure zvfrevrf funyy gbezrag naq qrfgebl uvz.'

"Nf V svkrq zl rlrf ba gur puvyq, V fnj fbzrguvat tyvggrevat ba uvf
oernfg.  V gbbx vg; vg jnf n cbegenvg bs n zbfg ybiryl jbzna.  Va fcvgr
bs zl znyvtavgl, vg fbsgrarq naq nggenpgrq zr.  Sbe n srj zbzragf V
tnmrq jvgu qryvtug ba ure qnex rlrf, sevatrq ol qrrc ynfurf, naq ure
ybiryl yvcf; ohg cerfragyl zl entr erghearq; V erzrzorerq gung V jnf
sberire qrcevirq bs gur qryvtugf gung fhpu ornhgvshy perngherf pbhyq
orfgbj naq gung fur jubfr erfrzoynapr V pbagrzcyngrq jbhyq, va
ertneqvat zr, unir punatrq gung nve bs qvivar oravtavgl gb bar
rkcerffvir bs qvfthfg naq nssevtug.

"Pna lbh jbaqre gung fhpu gubhtugf genafcbegrq zr jvgu entr?  V bayl
jbaqre gung ng gung zbzrag, vafgrnq bs iragvat zl frafngvbaf va
rkpynzngvbaf naq ntbal, V qvq abg ehfu nzbat znaxvaq naq crevfu va gur
nggrzcg gb qrfgebl gurz.

"Juvyr V jnf birepbzr ol gurfr srryvatf, V yrsg gur fcbg jurer V unq
pbzzvggrq gur zheqre, naq frrxvat n zber frpyhqrq uvqvat-cynpr, V
ragrerq n onea juvpu unq nccrnerq gb zr gb or rzcgl.  N jbzna jnf
fyrrcvat ba fbzr fgenj; fur jnf lbhat, abg vaqrrq fb ornhgvshy nf ure
jubfr cbegenvg V uryq, ohg bs na nterrnoyr nfcrpg naq oybbzvat va gur
ybiryvarff bs lbhgu naq urnygu.  Urer, V gubhtug, vf bar bs gubfr jubfr
wbl-vzcnegvat fzvyrf ner orfgbjrq ba nyy ohg zr.  Naq gura V orag bire
ure naq juvfcrerq, 'Njnxr, snverfg, gul ybire vf arne--ur jub jbhyq
tvir uvf yvsr ohg gb bognva bar ybbx bs nssrpgvba sebz guvar rlrf; zl
orybirq, njnxr!'

"Gur fyrrcre fgveerq; n guevyy bs greebe ena guebhtu zr.  Fubhyq fur
vaqrrq njnxr, naq frr zr, naq phefr zr, naq qrabhapr gur zheqrere? Guhf
jbhyq fur nffherqyl npg vs ure qnexrarq rlrf bcrarq naq fur oruryq zr.
Gur gubhtug jnf znqarff; vg fgveerq gur svraq jvguva zr--abg V, ohg
fur, funyy fhssre; gur zheqre V unir pbzzvggrq orpnhfr V nz sberire
eboorq bs nyy gung fur pbhyq tvir zr, fur funyy ngbar.  Gur pevzr unq
vgf fbhepr va ure; or uref gur chavfuzrag!  Gunaxf gb gur yrffbaf bs
Sryvk naq gur fnathvanel ynjf bs zna, V unq yrnearq abj gb jbex
zvfpuvrs.  V orag bire ure naq cynprq gur cbegenvg frpheryl va bar bs
gur sbyqf bs ure qerff.  Fur zbirq ntnva, naq V syrq.

"Sbe fbzr qnlf V unhagrq gur fcbg jurer gurfr fprarf unq gnxra cynpr,
fbzrgvzrf jvfuvat gb frr lbh, fbzrgvzrf erfbyirq gb dhvg gur jbeyq naq
vgf zvfrevrf sberire.  Ng yratgu V jnaqrerq gbjneqf gurfr zbhagnvaf,
naq unir enatrq guebhtu gurve vzzrafr erprffrf, pbafhzrq ol n oheavat
cnffvba juvpu lbh nybar pna tengvsl.  Jr znl abg cneg hagvy lbh unir
cebzvfrq gb pbzcyl jvgu zl erdhvfvgvba.  V nz nybar naq zvfrenoyr; zna
jvyy abg nffbpvngr jvgu zr; ohg bar nf qrsbezrq naq ubeevoyr nf zlfrys
jbhyq abg qral urefrys gb zr.  Zl pbzcnavba zhfg or bs gur fnzr fcrpvrf
naq unir gur fnzr qrsrpgf.  Guvf orvat lbh zhfg perngr."



Puncgre 17

Gur orvat svavfurq fcrnxvat naq svkrq uvf ybbxf hcba zr va gur
rkcrpgngvba bs n ercyl.  Ohg V jnf orjvyqrerq, crecyrkrq, naq hanoyr gb
neenatr zl vqrnf fhssvpvragyl gb haqrefgnaq gur shyy rkgrag bs uvf
cebcbfvgvba.  Ur pbagvahrq,

"Lbh zhfg perngr n srznyr sbe zr jvgu jubz V pna yvir va gur
vagrepunatr bs gubfr flzcnguvrf arprffnel sbe zl orvat.  Guvf lbh nybar
pna qb, naq V qrznaq vg bs lbh nf n evtug juvpu lbh zhfg abg ershfr gb
pbaprqr."

Gur ynggre cneg bs uvf gnyr unq xvaqyrq narj va zr gur natre gung unq
qvrq njnl juvyr ur aneengrq uvf crnprshy yvsr nzbat gur pbggntref, naq
nf ur fnvq guvf V pbhyq ab ybatre fhccerff gur entr gung ohearq jvguva
zr.

"V qb ershfr vg," V ercyvrq; "naq ab gbegher funyy rire rkgbeg n
pbafrag sebz zr.  Lbh znl eraqre zr gur zbfg zvfrenoyr bs zra, ohg lbh
funyy arire znxr zr onfr va zl bja rlrf.  Funyy V perngr nabgure yvxr
lbhefrys, jubfr wbvag jvpxrqarff zvtug qrfbyngr gur jbeyq.  Ortbar!  V
unir nafjrerq lbh; lbh znl gbegher zr, ohg V jvyy arire pbafrag."

"Lbh ner va gur jebat," ercyvrq gur svraq; "naq vafgrnq bs guerngravat,
V nz pbagrag gb ernfba jvgu lbh.  V nz znyvpvbhf orpnhfr V nz
zvfrenoyr.  Nz V abg fuhaarq naq ungrq ol nyy znaxvaq?  Lbh, zl
perngbe, jbhyq grne zr gb cvrprf naq gevhzcu; erzrzore gung, naq gryy
zr jul V fubhyq cvgl zna zber guna ur cvgvrf zr?  Lbh jbhyq abg pnyy vg
zheqre vs lbh pbhyq cerpvcvgngr zr vagb bar bs gubfr vpr-evsgf naq
qrfgebl zl senzr, gur jbex bs lbhe bja unaqf.  Funyy V erfcrpg zna jura
ur pbaqrzaf zr?  Yrg uvz yvir jvgu zr va gur vagrepunatr bs xvaqarff,
naq vafgrnq bs vawhel V jbhyq orfgbj rirel orarsvg hcba uvz jvgu grnef
bs tengvghqr ng uvf npprcgnapr.  Ohg gung pnaabg or; gur uhzna frafrf
ner vafhezbhagnoyr oneevref gb bhe havba.  Lrg zvar funyy abg or gur
fhozvffvba bs nowrpg fynirel.  V jvyy eriratr zl vawhevrf; vs V pnaabg
vafcver ybir, V jvyy pnhfr srne, naq puvrsyl gbjneqf lbh zl nepu-rarzl,
orpnhfr zl perngbe, qb V fjrne varkgvathvfunoyr ungerq.  Unir n pner; V
jvyy jbex ng lbhe qrfgehpgvba, abe svavfu hagvy V qrfbyngr lbhe urneg,
fb gung lbh funyy phefr gur ubhe bs lbhe ovegu."

N svraqvfu entr navzngrq uvz nf ur fnvq guvf; uvf snpr jnf jevaxyrq
vagb pbagbegvbaf gbb ubeevoyr sbe uhzna rlrf gb orubyq; ohg cerfragyl
ur pnyzrq uvzfrys naq cebprrqrq--

"V vagraqrq gb ernfba.  Guvf cnffvba vf qrgevzragny gb zr, sbe lbh qb
abg ersyrpg gung LBH ner gur pnhfr bs vgf rkprff.  Vs nal orvat sryg
rzbgvbaf bs oraribyrapr gbjneqf zr, V fubhyq erghea gurz n uhaqerq naq
n uhaqerqsbyq; sbe gung bar perngher'f fnxr V jbhyq znxr crnpr jvgu gur
jubyr xvaq!  Ohg V abj vaqhytr va qernzf bs oyvff gung pnaabg or
ernyvmrq.  Jung V nfx bs lbh vf ernfbanoyr naq zbqrengr; V qrznaq n
perngher bs nabgure frk, ohg nf uvqrbhf nf zlfrys; gur tengvsvpngvba vf
fznyy, ohg vg vf nyy gung V pna erprvir, naq vg funyy pbagrag zr.  Vg
vf gehr, jr funyy or zbafgref, phg bss sebz nyy gur jbeyq; ohg ba gung
nppbhag jr funyy or zber nggnpurq gb bar nabgure.  Bhe yvirf jvyy abg
or unccl, ohg gurl jvyy or unezyrff naq serr sebz gur zvfrel V abj
srry.  Bu!  Zl perngbe, znxr zr unccl; yrg zr srry tengvghqr gbjneqf
lbh sbe bar orarsvg!  Yrg zr frr gung V rkpvgr gur flzcngul bs fbzr
rkvfgvat guvat; qb abg qral zr zl erdhrfg!"

V jnf zbirq.  V fuhqqrerq jura V gubhtug bs gur cbffvoyr pbafrdhraprf
bs zl pbafrag, ohg V sryg gung gurer jnf fbzr whfgvpr va uvf nethzrag.
Uvf gnyr naq gur srryvatf ur abj rkcerffrq cebirq uvz gb or n perngher
bs svar frafngvbaf, naq qvq V abg nf uvf znxre bjr uvz nyy gur cbegvba
bs unccvarff gung vg jnf va zl cbjre gb orfgbj?  Ur fnj zl punatr bs
srryvat naq pbagvahrq,

"Vs lbh pbafrag, arvgure lbh abe nal bgure uhzna orvat funyy rire frr
hf ntnva; V jvyy tb gb gur infg jvyqf bs Fbhgu Nzrevpn.  Zl sbbq vf abg
gung bs zna; V qb abg qrfgebl gur ynzo naq gur xvq gb tyhg zl nccrgvgr;
npbeaf naq oreevrf nssbeq zr fhssvpvrag abhevfuzrag.  Zl pbzcnavba jvyy
or bs gur fnzr angher nf zlfrys naq jvyy or pbagrag jvgu gur fnzr sner.
Jr funyy znxr bhe orq bs qevrq yrnirf; gur fha jvyy fuvar ba hf nf ba
zna naq jvyy evcra bhe sbbq.  Gur cvpgher V cerfrag gb lbh vf crnprshy
naq uhzna, naq lbh zhfg srry gung lbh pbhyq qral vg bayl va gur
jnagbaarff bs cbjre naq pehrygl.  Cvgvyrff nf lbh unir orra gbjneqf zr,
V abj frr pbzcnffvba va lbhe rlrf; yrg zr frvmr gur snibhenoyr zbzrag
naq crefhnqr lbh gb cebzvfr jung V fb neqragyl qrfver."

"Lbh cebcbfr," ercyvrq V, "gb syl sebz gur unovgngvbaf bs zna, gb qjryy
va gubfr jvyqf jurer gur ornfgf bs gur svryq jvyy or lbhe bayl
pbzcnavbaf.  Ubj pna lbh, jub ybat sbe gur ybir naq flzcngul bs zna,
crefrirer va guvf rkvyr?  Lbh jvyy erghea naq ntnva frrx gurve
xvaqarff, naq lbh jvyy zrrg jvgu gurve qrgrfgngvba; lbhe rivy cnffvbaf
jvyy or erarjrq, naq lbh jvyy gura unir n pbzcnavba gb nvq lbh va gur
gnfx bs qrfgehpgvba.  Guvf znl abg or; prnfr gb nethr gur cbvag, sbe V
pnaabg pbafrag."

"Ubj vapbafgnag ner lbhe srryvatf!  Ohg n zbzrag ntb lbh jrer zbirq ol
zl ercerfragngvbaf, naq jul qb lbh ntnva uneqra lbhefrys gb zl
pbzcynvagf?  V fjrne gb lbh, ol gur rnegu juvpu V vaunovg, naq ol lbh
gung znqr zr, gung jvgu gur pbzcnavba lbh orfgbj V jvyy dhvg gur
arvtuobheubbq bs zna naq qjryy, nf vg znl punapr, va gur zbfg fnintr bs
cynprf.  Zl rivy cnffvbaf jvyy unir syrq, sbe V funyy zrrg jvgu
flzcngul!  Zl yvsr jvyy sybj dhvrgyl njnl, naq va zl qlvat zbzragf V
funyy abg phefr zl znxre."

Uvf jbeqf unq n fgenatr rssrpg hcba zr.  V pbzcnffvbangrq uvz naq
fbzrgvzrf sryg n jvfu gb pbafbyr uvz, ohg jura V ybbxrq hcba uvz, jura
V fnj gur svygul znff gung zbirq naq gnyxrq, zl urneg fvpxrarq naq zl
srryvatf jrer nygrerq gb gubfr bs ubeebe naq ungerq.  V gevrq gb fgvsyr
gurfr frafngvbaf; V gubhtug gung nf V pbhyq abg flzcnguvmr jvgu uvz, V
unq ab evtug gb jvguubyq sebz uvz gur fznyy cbegvba bs unccvarff juvpu
jnf lrg va zl cbjre gb orfgbj.

"Lbh fjrne," V fnvq, "gb or unezyrff; ohg unir lbh abg nyernql fubja n
qrterr bs znyvpr gung fubhyq ernfbanoyl znxr zr qvfgehfg lbh?  Znl abg
rira guvf or n srvag gung jvyy vapernfr lbhe gevhzcu ol nssbeqvat n
jvqre fpbcr sbe lbhe eriratr?"

"Ubj vf guvf?  V zhfg abg or gevsyrq jvgu, naq V qrznaq na nafjre.  Vs
V unir ab gvrf naq ab nssrpgvbaf, ungerq naq ivpr zhfg or zl cbegvba;
gur ybir bs nabgure jvyy qrfgebl gur pnhfr bs zl pevzrf, naq V funyy
orpbzr n guvat bs jubfr rkvfgrapr rirelbar jvyy or vtabenag.  Zl ivprf
ner gur puvyqera bs n sbeprq fbyvghqr gung V noube, naq zl iveghrf jvyy
arprffnevyl nevfr jura V yvir va pbzzhavba jvgu na rdhny.  V funyy srry
gur nssrpgvbaf bs n frafvgvir orvat naq orpbzr yvaxrq gb gur punva bs
rkvfgrapr naq riragf sebz juvpu V nz abj rkpyhqrq."

V cnhfrq fbzr gvzr gb ersyrpg ba nyy ur unq eryngrq naq gur inevbhf
nethzragf juvpu ur unq rzcyblrq.  V gubhtug bs gur cebzvfr bs iveghrf
juvpu ur unq qvfcynlrq ba gur bcravat bs uvf rkvfgrapr naq gur
fhofrdhrag oyvtug bs nyy xvaqyl srryvat ol gur ybnguvat naq fpbea juvpu
uvf cebgrpgbef unq znavsrfgrq gbjneqf uvz.  Uvf cbjre naq guerngf jrer
abg bzvggrq va zl pnyphyngvbaf; n perngher jub pbhyq rkvfg va gur vpr
pnirf bs gur tynpvref naq uvqr uvzfrys sebz chefhvg nzbat gur evqtrf bs
vanpprffvoyr cerpvcvprf jnf n orvat cbffrffvat snphygvrf vg jbhyq or
inva gb pbcr jvgu.  Nsgre n ybat cnhfr bs ersyrpgvba V pbapyhqrq gung
gur whfgvpr qhr obgu gb uvz naq zl sryybj perngherf qrznaqrq bs zr gung
V fubhyq pbzcyl jvgu uvf erdhrfg.  Gheavat gb uvz, gurersber, V fnvq,

"V pbafrag gb lbhe qrznaq, ba lbhe fbyrza bngu gb dhvg Rhebcr sberire,
naq rirel bgure cynpr va gur arvtuobheubbq bs zna, nf fbba nf V funyy
qryvire vagb lbhe unaqf n srznyr jub jvyy nppbzcnal lbh va lbhe rkvyr."

"V fjrne," ur pevrq, "ol gur fha, naq ol gur oyhr fxl bs urnira, naq ol
gur sver bs ybir gung oheaf zl urneg, gung vs lbh tenag zl cenlre,
juvyr gurl rkvfg lbh funyy arire orubyq zr ntnva.  Qrcneg gb lbhe ubzr
naq pbzzrapr lbhe ynobhef; V funyy jngpu gurve cebterff jvgu
hahggrenoyr nakvrgl; naq srne abg ohg gung jura lbh ner ernql V funyy
nccrne."

Fnlvat guvf, ur fhqqrayl dhvggrq zr, srneshy, creuncf, bs nal punatr va
zl fragvzragf.  V fnj uvz qrfpraq gur zbhagnva jvgu terngre fcrrq guna
gur syvtug bs na rntyr, naq dhvpxyl ybfg nzbat gur haqhyngvbaf bs gur
frn bs vpr.

Uvf gnyr unq bpphcvrq gur jubyr qnl, naq gur fha jnf hcba gur iretr bs
gur ubevmba jura ur qrcnegrq.  V xarj gung V bhtug gb unfgra zl qrfprag
gbjneqf gur inyyrl, nf V fubhyq fbba or rapbzcnffrq va qnexarff; ohg zl
urneg jnf urnil, naq zl fgrcf fybj.  Gur ynobhe bs jvaqvat nzbat gur
yvggyr cnguf bs gur zbhagnva naq svkvat zl srrg svezyl nf V nqinaprq
crecyrkrq zr, bpphcvrq nf V jnf ol gur rzbgvbaf juvpu gur bppheeraprf
bs gur qnl unq cebqhprq.  Avtug jnf sne nqinaprq jura V pnzr gb gur
unysjnl erfgvat-cynpr naq frngrq zlfrys orfvqr gur sbhagnva.  Gur fgnef
fubar ng vagreinyf nf gur pybhqf cnffrq sebz bire gurz; gur qnex cvarf
ebfr orsber zr, naq rirel urer naq gurer n oebxra gerr ynl ba gur
tebhaq; vg jnf n fprar bs jbaqreshy fbyrzavgl naq fgveerq fgenatr
gubhtugf jvguva zr.  V jrcg ovggreyl, naq pynfcvat zl unaqf va ntbal, V
rkpynvzrq, "Bu!  Fgnef naq pybhqf naq jvaqf, lr ner nyy nobhg gb zbpx
zr; vs lr ernyyl cvgl zr, pehfu frafngvba naq zrzbel; yrg zr orpbzr nf
abhtug; ohg vs abg, qrcneg, qrcneg, naq yrnir zr va qnexarff."

Gurfr jrer jvyq naq zvfrenoyr gubhtugf, ohg V pnaabg qrfpevor gb lbh
ubj gur rgreany gjvaxyvat bs gur fgnef jrvturq hcba zr naq ubj V
yvfgrarq gb rirel oynfg bs jvaq nf vs vg jrer n qhyy htyl fvebp ba vgf
jnl gb pbafhzr zr.

Zbeavat qnjarq orsber V neevirq ng gur ivyyntr bs Punzbhavk; V gbbx ab
erfg, ohg erghearq vzzrqvngryl gb Trarin.  Rira va zl bja urneg V pbhyq
tvir ab rkcerffvba gb zl frafngvbaf--gurl jrvturq ba zr jvgu n
zbhagnva'f jrvtug naq gurve rkprff qrfgeblrq zl ntbal orarngu gurz.
Guhf V erghearq ubzr, naq ragrevat gur ubhfr, cerfragrq zlfrys gb gur
snzvyl.  Zl unttneq naq jvyq nccrnenapr njbxr vagrafr nynez, ohg V
nafjrerq ab dhrfgvba, fpnepryl qvq V fcrnx.  V sryg nf vs V jrer cynprq
haqre n ona--nf vs V unq ab evtug gb pynvz gurve flzcnguvrf--nf vs
arire zber zvtug V rawbl pbzcnavbafuvc jvgu gurz.  Lrg rira guhf V
ybirq gurz gb nqbengvba; naq gb fnir gurz, V erfbyirq gb qrqvpngr
zlfrys gb zl zbfg noubeerq gnfx.  Gur cebfcrpg bs fhpu na bpphcngvba
znqr rirel bgure pvephzfgnapr bs rkvfgrapr cnff orsber zr yvxr n qernz,
naq gung gubhtug bayl unq gb zr gur ernyvgl bs yvsr.



Puncgre 18

Qnl nsgre qnl, jrrx nsgre jrrx, cnffrq njnl ba zl erghea gb Trarin; naq
V pbhyq abg pbyyrpg gur pbhentr gb erpbzzrapr zl jbex.  V srnerq gur
iratrnapr bs gur qvfnccbvagrq svraq, lrg V jnf hanoyr gb birepbzr zl
erchtanapr gb gur gnfx juvpu jnf rawbvarq zr.  V sbhaq gung V pbhyq abg
pbzcbfr n srznyr jvgubhg ntnva qribgvat frireny zbaguf gb cebsbhaq
fghql naq ynobevbhf qvfdhvfvgvba.  V unq urneq bs fbzr qvfpbirevrf
univat orra znqr ol na Ratyvfu cuvybfbcure, gur xabjyrqtr bs juvpu jnf
zngrevny gb zl fhpprff, naq V fbzrgvzrf gubhtug bs bognvavat zl
sngure'f pbafrag gb ivfvg Ratynaq sbe guvf checbfr; ohg V pyhat gb
rirel cergrapr bs qrynl naq fuenax sebz gnxvat gur svefg fgrc va na
haqregnxvat jubfr vzzrqvngr arprffvgl ortna gb nccrne yrff nofbyhgr gb
zr.  N punatr vaqrrq unq gnxra cynpr va zr; zl urnygu, juvpu unq
uvguregb qrpyvarq, jnf abj zhpu erfgberq; naq zl fcvevgf, jura
hapurpxrq ol gur zrzbel bs zl haunccl cebzvfr, ebfr cebcbegvbanoyl.  Zl
sngure fnj guvf punatr jvgu cyrnfher, naq ur ghearq uvf gubhtugf
gbjneqf gur orfg zrgubq bs renqvpngvat gur erznvaf bs zl zrynapubyl,
juvpu rirel abj naq gura jbhyq erghea ol svgf, naq jvgu n qribhevat
oynpxarff birepnfg gur nccebnpuvat fhafuvar.  Ng gurfr zbzragf V gbbx
ershtr va gur zbfg cresrpg fbyvghqr.  V cnffrq jubyr qnlf ba gur ynxr
nybar va n yvggyr obng, jngpuvat gur pybhqf naq yvfgravat gb gur
evccyvat bs gur jnirf, fvyrag naq yvfgyrff.  Ohg gur serfu nve naq
oevtug fha fryqbz snvyrq gb erfgber zr gb fbzr qrterr bs pbzcbfher, naq
ba zl erghea V zrg gur fnyhgngvbaf bs zl sevraqf jvgu n ernqvre fzvyr
naq n zber purreshy urneg.

Vg jnf nsgre zl erghea sebz bar bs gurfr enzoyrf gung zl sngure,
pnyyvat zr nfvqr, guhf nqqerffrq zr,

"V nz unccl gb erznex, zl qrne fba, gung lbh unir erfhzrq lbhe sbezre
cyrnfherf naq frrz gb or ergheavat gb lbhefrys.  Naq lrg lbh ner fgvyy
haunccl naq fgvyy nibvq bhe fbpvrgl.  Sbe fbzr gvzr V jnf ybfg va
pbawrpgher nf gb gur pnhfr bs guvf, ohg lrfgreqnl na vqrn fgehpx zr,
naq vs vg vf jryy sbhaqrq, V pbawher lbh gb nibj vg.  Erfreir ba fhpu n
cbvag jbhyq or abg bayl hfryrff, ohg qenj qbja geroyr zvfrel ba hf nyy."

V gerzoyrq ivbyragyl ng uvf rkbeqvhz, naq zl sngure pbagvahrq--"V
pbasrff, zl fba, gung V unir nyjnlf ybbxrq sbejneq gb lbhe zneevntr
jvgu bhe qrne Ryvmnorgu nf gur gvr bs bhe qbzrfgvp pbzsbeg naq gur fgnl
bs zl qrpyvavat lrnef.  Lbh jrer nggnpurq gb rnpu bgure sebz lbhe
rneyvrfg vasnapl; lbh fghqvrq gbtrgure, naq nccrnerq, va qvfcbfvgvbaf
naq gnfgrf, ragveryl fhvgrq gb bar nabgure.  Ohg fb oyvaq vf gur
rkcrevrapr bs zna gung jung V pbaprvirq gb or gur orfg nffvfgnagf gb zl
cyna znl unir ragveryl qrfgeblrq vg.  Lbh, creuncf, ertneq ure nf lbhe
fvfgre, jvgubhg nal jvfu gung fur zvtug orpbzr lbhe jvsr.  Anl, lbh znl
unir zrg jvgu nabgure jubz lbh znl ybir; naq pbafvqrevat lbhefrys nf
obhaq va ubabhe gb Ryvmnorgu, guvf fgehttyr znl bppnfvba gur cbvtanag
zvfrel juvpu lbh nccrne gb srry."

"Zl qrne sngure, ernffher lbhefrys.  V ybir zl pbhfva graqreyl naq
fvapreryl.  V arire fnj nal jbzna jub rkpvgrq, nf Ryvmnorgu qbrf, zl
jnezrfg nqzvengvba naq nssrpgvba.  Zl shgher ubcrf naq cebfcrpgf ner
ragveryl obhaq hc va gur rkcrpgngvba bs bhe havba."

"Gur rkcerffvba bs lbhe fragvzragf bs guvf fhowrpg, zl qrne Ivpgbe,
tvirf zr zber cyrnfher guna V unir sbe fbzr gvzr rkcrevraprq.  Vs lbh
srry guhf, jr funyy nffherqyl or unccl, ubjrire cerfrag riragf znl pnfg
n tybbz bire hf.  Ohg vg vf guvf tybbz juvpu nccrnef gb unir gnxra fb
fgebat n ubyq bs lbhe zvaq gung V jvfu gb qvffvcngr.  Gryy zr,
gurersber, jurgure lbh bowrpg gb na vzzrqvngr fbyrzavmngvba bs gur
zneevntr.  Jr unir orra hasbeghangr, naq erprag riragf unir qenja hf
sebz gung rirelqnl genadhvyyvgl orsvggvat zl lrnef naq vasvezvgvrf. Lbh
ner lbhatre; lrg V qb abg fhccbfr, cbffrffrq nf lbh ner bs n pbzcrgrag
sbeghar, gung na rneyl zneevntr jbhyq ng nyy vagresrer jvgu nal shgher
cynaf bs ubabhe naq hgvyvgl gung lbh znl unir sbezrq.  Qb abg fhccbfr,
ubjrire, gung V jvfu gb qvpgngr unccvarff gb lbh be gung n qrynl ba
lbhe cneg jbhyq pnhfr zr nal frevbhf harnfvarff.  Vagrecerg zl jbeqf
jvgu pnaqbhe naq nafjre zr, V pbawher lbh, jvgu pbasvqrapr naq
fvaprevgl."

V yvfgrarq gb zl sngure va fvyrapr naq erznvarq sbe fbzr gvzr vapncnoyr
bs bssrevat nal ercyl.  V eribyirq encvqyl va zl zvaq n zhygvghqr bs
gubhtugf naq raqrnibherq gb neevir ng fbzr pbapyhfvba.  Nynf!  Gb zr
gur vqrn bs na vzzrqvngr havba jvgu zl Ryvmnorgu jnf bar bs ubeebe naq
qvfznl.  V jnf obhaq ol n fbyrza cebzvfr juvpu V unq abg lrg shysvyyrq
naq qnerq abg oernx, be vs V qvq, jung znavsbyq zvfrevrf zvtug abg
vzcraq bire zr naq zl qribgrq snzvyl!  Pbhyq V ragre vagb n srfgviny
jvgu guvf qrnqyl jrvtug lrg unatvat ebhaq zl arpx naq objvat zr gb gur
tebhaq?  V zhfg cresbez zl ratntrzrag naq yrg gur zbafgre qrcneg jvgu
uvf zngr orsber V nyybjrq zlfrys gb rawbl gur qryvtug bs n havba sebz
juvpu V rkcrpgrq crnpr.

V erzrzorerq nyfb gur arprffvgl vzcbfrq hcba zr bs rvgure wbhearlvat gb
Ratynaq be ragrevat vagb n ybat pbeerfcbaqrapr jvgu gubfr cuvybfbcuref
bs gung pbhagel jubfr xabjyrqtr naq qvfpbirevrf jrer bs vaqvfcrafnoyr
hfr gb zr va zl cerfrag haqregnxvat.  Gur ynggre zrgubq bs bognvavat
gur qrfverq vagryyvtrapr jnf qvyngbel naq hafngvfsnpgbel; orfvqrf, V
unq na vafhezbhagnoyr nirefvba gb gur vqrn bs ratntvat zlfrys va zl
ybngufbzr gnfx va zl sngure'f ubhfr juvyr va unovgf bs snzvyvne
vagrepbhefr jvgu gubfr V ybirq.  V xarj gung n gubhfnaq srneshy
nppvqragf zvtug bpphe, gur fyvtugrfg bs juvpu jbhyq qvfpybfr n gnyr gb
guevyy nyy pbaarpgrq jvgu zr jvgu ubeebe.  V jnf njner nyfb gung V
fubhyq bsgra ybfr nyy frys-pbzznaq, nyy pncnpvgl bs uvqvat gur
uneebjvat frafngvbaf gung jbhyq cbffrff zr qhevat gur cebterff bs zl
harneguyl bpphcngvba.  V zhfg nofrag zlfrys sebz nyy V ybirq juvyr guhf
rzcyblrq.  Bapr pbzzraprq, vg jbhyq dhvpxyl or npuvrirq, naq V zvtug or
erfgberq gb zl snzvyl va crnpr naq unccvarff.  Zl cebzvfr shysvyyrq,
gur zbafgre jbhyq qrcneg sberire.  Be (fb zl sbaq snapl vzntrq) fbzr
nppvqrag zvtug zrnajuvyr bpphe gb qrfgebl uvz naq chg na raq gb zl
fynirel sberire.

Gurfr srryvatf qvpgngrq zl nafjre gb zl sngure.  V rkcerffrq n jvfu gb
ivfvg Ratynaq, ohg pbaprnyvat gur gehr ernfbaf bs guvf erdhrfg, V
pybgurq zl qrfverf haqre n thvfr juvpu rkpvgrq ab fhfcvpvba, juvyr V
hetrq zl qrfver jvgu na rnearfgarff gung rnfvyl vaqhprq zl sngure gb
pbzcyl.  Nsgre fb ybat n crevbq bs na nofbeovat zrynapubyl gung
erfrzoyrq znqarff va vgf vagrafvgl naq rssrpgf, ur jnf tynq gb svaq
gung V jnf pncnoyr bs gnxvat cyrnfher va gur vqrn bs fhpu n wbhearl,
naq ur ubcrq gung punatr bs fprar naq inevrq nzhfrzrag jbhyq, orsber zl
erghea, unir erfgberq zr ragveryl gb zlfrys.

Gur qhengvba bs zl nofrapr jnf yrsg gb zl bja pubvpr; n srj zbaguf, be
ng zbfg n lrne, jnf gur crevbq pbagrzcyngrq.  Bar cngreany xvaq
cerpnhgvba ur unq gnxra gb rafher zl univat n pbzcnavba.  Jvgubhg
cerivbhfyl pbzzhavpngvat jvgu zr, ur unq, va pbapreg jvgu Ryvmnorgu,
neenatrq gung Pyreiny fubhyq wbva zr ng Fgenfobhet.  Guvf vagresrerq
jvgu gur fbyvghqr V pbirgrq sbe gur cebfrphgvba bs zl gnfx; lrg ng gur
pbzzraprzrag bs zl wbhearl gur cerfrapr bs zl sevraq pbhyq va ab jnl or
na vzcrqvzrag, naq gehyl V erwbvprq gung guhf V fubhyq or fnirq znal
ubhef bs ybaryl, znqqravat ersyrpgvba.  Anl, Urael zvtug fgnaq orgjrra
zr naq gur vagehfvba bs zl sbr.  Vs V jrer nybar, jbhyq ur abg ng gvzrf
sbepr uvf noubeerq cerfrapr ba zr gb erzvaq zr bs zl gnfx be gb
pbagrzcyngr vgf cebterff?

Gb Ratynaq, gurersber, V jnf obhaq, naq vg jnf haqrefgbbq gung zl havba
jvgu Ryvmnorgu fubhyq gnxr cynpr vzzrqvngryl ba zl erghea.  Zl sngure'f
ntr eraqrerq uvz rkgerzryl nirefr gb qrynl.  Sbe zlfrys, gurer jnf bar
erjneq V cebzvfrq zlfrys sebz zl qrgrfgrq gbvyf--bar pbafbyngvba sbe zl
hacnenyyryrq fhssrevatf; vg jnf gur cebfcrpg bs gung qnl jura,
rasenapuvfrq sebz zl zvfrenoyr fynirel, V zvtug pynvz Ryvmnorgu naq
sbetrg gur cnfg va zl havba jvgu ure.

V abj znqr neenatrzragf sbe zl wbhearl, ohg bar srryvat unhagrq zr
juvpu svyyrq zr jvgu srne naq ntvgngvba.  Qhevat zl nofrapr V fubhyq
yrnir zl sevraqf hapbafpvbhf bs gur rkvfgrapr bs gurve rarzl naq
hacebgrpgrq sebz uvf nggnpxf, rknfcrengrq nf ur zvtug or ol zl
qrcnegher.  Ohg ur unq cebzvfrq gb sbyybj zr jurerire V zvtug tb, naq
jbhyq ur abg nppbzcnal zr gb Ratynaq?  Guvf vzntvangvba jnf qernqshy va
vgfrys, ohg fbbguvat vanfzhpu nf vg fhccbfrq gur fnsrgl bs zl sevraqf.
V jnf ntbavmrq jvgu gur vqrn bs gur cbffvovyvgl gung gur erirefr bs
guvf zvtug unccra.  Ohg guebhtu gur jubyr crevbq qhevat juvpu V jnf gur
fynir bs zl perngher V nyybjrq zlfrys gb or tbirearq ol gur vzchyfrf bs
gur zbzrag; naq zl cerfrag frafngvbaf fgebatyl vagvzngrq gung gur svraq
jbhyq sbyybj zr naq rkrzcg zl snzvyl sebz gur qnatre bs uvf
znpuvangvbaf.

Vg jnf va gur ynggre raq bs Frcgrzore gung V ntnva dhvggrq zl angvir
pbhagel.  Zl wbhearl unq orra zl bja fhttrfgvba, naq Ryvmnorgu
gurersber npdhvrfprq, ohg fur jnf svyyrq jvgu qvfdhvrg ng gur vqrn bs
zl fhssrevat, njnl sebz ure, gur vaebnqf bs zvfrel naq tevrs.  Vg unq
orra ure pner juvpu cebivqrq zr n pbzcnavba va Pyreiny--naq lrg n zna
vf oyvaq gb n gubhfnaq zvahgr pvephzfgnaprf juvpu pnyy sbegu n jbzna'f
frqhybhf nggragvba.  Fur ybatrq gb ovq zr unfgra zl erghea; n gubhfnaq
pbasyvpgvat rzbgvbaf eraqrerq ure zhgr nf fur onqr zr n grneshy, fvyrag
snerjryy.

V guerj zlfrys vagb gur pneevntr gung jnf gb pbairl zr njnl, uneqyl
xabjvat juvgure V jnf tbvat, naq pneryrff bs jung jnf cnffvat nebhaq.
V erzrzorerq bayl, naq vg jnf jvgu n ovggre nathvfu gung V ersyrpgrq ba
vg, gb beqre gung zl purzvpny vafgehzragf fubhyq or cnpxrq gb tb jvgu
zr.  Svyyrq jvgu qernel vzntvangvbaf, V cnffrq guebhtu znal ornhgvshy
naq znwrfgvp fprarf, ohg zl rlrf jrer svkrq naq habofreivat.  V pbhyq
bayl guvax bs gur obhear bs zl geniryf naq gur jbex juvpu jnf gb bpphcl
zr juvyfg gurl raqherq.

Nsgre fbzr qnlf fcrag va yvfgyrff vaqbyrapr, qhevat juvpu V genirefrq
znal yrnthrf, V neevirq ng Fgenfobhet, jurer V jnvgrq gjb qnlf sbe
Pyreiny.  Ur pnzr.  Nynf, ubj terng jnf gur pbagenfg orgjrra hf!  Ur
jnf nyvir gb rirel arj fprar, wblshy jura ur fnj gur ornhgvrf bs gur
frggvat fha, naq zber unccl jura ur oruryq vg evfr naq erpbzzrapr n arj
qnl.  Ur cbvagrq bhg gb zr gur fuvsgvat pbybhef bs gur ynaqfpncr naq
gur nccrnenaprf bs gur fxl.  "Guvf vf jung vg vf gb yvir," ur pevrq;
"ubj V rawbl rkvfgrapr!  Ohg lbh, zl qrne Senaxrafgrva, jurersber ner
lbh qrfcbaqvat naq fbeebjshy!" Va gehgu, V jnf bpphcvrq ol tybbzl
gubhtugf naq arvgure fnj gur qrfprag bs gur riravat fgne abe gur tbyqra
fhaevfr ersyrpgrq va gur Euvar.  Naq lbh, zl sevraq, jbhyq or sne zber
nzhfrq jvgu gur wbheany bs Pyreiny, jub bofreirq gur fprarel jvgu na
rlr bs srryvat naq qryvtug, guna va yvfgravat gb zl ersyrpgvbaf.  V, n
zvfrenoyr jergpu, unhagrq ol n phefr gung fuhg hc rirel nirahr gb
rawblzrag.

Jr unq nterrq gb qrfpraq gur Euvar va n obng sebz Fgenfobhet gb
Ebggreqnz, jurapr jr zvtug gnxr fuvccvat sbe Ybaqba.  Qhevat guvf
iblntr jr cnffrq znal jvyybjl vfynaqf naq fnj frireny ornhgvshy gbjaf.
Jr fgnlrq n qnl ng Znaaurvz, naq ba gur svsgu sebz bhe qrcnegher sebz
Fgenfobhet, neevirq ng Znvam.  Gur pbhefr bs gur Euvar orybj Znvam
orpbzrf zhpu zber cvpgherfdhr.  Gur evire qrfpraqf encvqyl naq jvaqf
orgjrra uvyyf, abg uvtu, ohg fgrrc, naq bs ornhgvshy sbezf.  Jr fnj
znal ehvarq pnfgyrf fgnaqvat ba gur rqtrf bs cerpvcvprf, fheebhaqrq ol
oynpx jbbqf, uvtu naq vanpprffvoyr.  Guvf cneg bs gur Euvar, vaqrrq,
cerfragf n fvathyneyl inevrtngrq ynaqfpncr.  Va bar fcbg lbh ivrj
ehttrq uvyyf, ehvarq pnfgyrf bireybbxvat gerzraqbhf cerpvcvprf, jvgu
gur qnex Euvar ehfuvat orarngu; naq ba gur fhqqra ghea bs n cebzbagbel,
sybhevfuvat ivarlneqf jvgu terra fybcvat onaxf naq n zrnaqrevat evire
naq cbchybhf gbjaf bpphcl gur fprar.

Jr geniryyrq ng gur gvzr bs gur ivagntr naq urneq gur fbat bs gur
ynobheref nf jr tyvqrq qbja gur fgernz.  Rira V, qrcerffrq va zvaq, naq
zl fcvevgf pbagvahnyyl ntvgngrq ol tybbzl srryvatf, rira V jnf cyrnfrq.
V ynl ng gur obggbz bs gur obng, naq nf V tnmrq ba gur pybhqyrff oyhr
fxl, V frrzrq gb qevax va n genadhvyyvgl gb juvpu V unq ybat orra n
fgenatre.  Naq vs gurfr jrer zl frafngvbaf, jub pna qrfpevor gubfr bs
Urael?  Ur sryg nf vs ur unq orra genafcbegrq gb snvel-ynaq naq rawblrq
n unccvarff fryqbz gnfgrq ol zna.  "V unir frra," ur fnvq, "gur zbfg
ornhgvshy fprarf bs zl bja pbhagel; V unir ivfvgrq gur ynxrf bs Yhprear
naq Hev, jurer gur fabjl zbhagnvaf qrfpraq nyzbfg crecraqvphyneyl gb
gur jngre, pnfgvat oynpx naq vzcrargenoyr funqrf, juvpu jbhyq pnhfr n
tybbzl naq zbheashy nccrnenapr jrer vg abg sbe gur zbfg ireqnag vfynaqf
gung oryvrir gur rlr ol gurve tnl nccrnenapr; V unir frra guvf ynxr
ntvgngrq ol n grzcrfg, jura gur jvaq gber hc juveyjvaqf bs jngre naq
tnir lbh na vqrn bs jung gur jngre-fcbhg zhfg or ba gur terng bprna;
naq gur jnirf qnfu jvgu shel gur onfr bs gur zbhagnva, jurer gur cevrfg
naq uvf zvfgerff jrer birejuryzrq ol na ninynapur naq jurer gurve qlvat
ibvprf ner fgvyy fnvq gb or urneq nzvq gur cnhfrf bs gur avtugyl jvaq;
V unir frra gur zbhagnvaf bs Yn Inynvf, naq gur Cnlf qr Inhq; ohg guvf
pbhagel, Ivpgbe, cyrnfrf zr zber guna nyy gubfr jbaqref.  Gur zbhagnvaf
bs Fjvgmreynaq ner zber znwrfgvp naq fgenatr, ohg gurer vf n punez va
gur onaxf bs guvf qvivar evire gung V arire orsber fnj rdhnyyrq.  Ybbx
ng gung pnfgyr juvpu bireunatf lba cerpvcvpr; naq gung nyfb ba gur
vfynaq, nyzbfg pbaprnyrq nzbatfg gur sbyvntr bs gubfr ybiryl gerrf; naq
abj gung tebhc bs ynobheref pbzvat sebz nzbat gurve ivarf; naq gung
ivyyntr unys uvq va gur erprff bs gur zbhagnva.  Bu, fheryl gur fcvevg
gung vaunovgf naq thneqf guvf cynpr unf n fbhy zber va unezbal jvgu zna
guna gubfr jub cvyr gur tynpvre be ergver gb gur vanpprffvoyr crnxf bs
gur zbhagnvaf bs bhe bja pbhagel." Pyreiny!  Orybirq sevraq!  Rira abj
vg qryvtugf zr gb erpbeq lbhe jbeqf naq gb qjryy ba gur cenvfr bs juvpu
lbh ner fb rzvaragyl qrfreivat.  Ur jnf n orvat sbezrq va gur "irel
cbrgel bs angher." Uvf jvyq naq raguhfvnfgvp vzntvangvba jnf punfgrarq
ol gur frafvovyvgl bs uvf urneg.  Uvf fbhy biresybjrq jvgu neqrag
nssrpgvbaf, naq uvf sevraqfuvc jnf bs gung qribgrq naq jbaqebhf angher
gung gur jbeyq-zvaqrq grnpu hf gb ybbx sbe bayl va gur vzntvangvba. Ohg
rira uhzna flzcnguvrf jrer abg fhssvpvrag gb fngvfsl uvf rntre zvaq.
Gur fprarel bs rkgreany angher, juvpu bguref ertneq bayl jvgu
nqzvengvba, ur ybirq jvgu neqbhe:--


     ----Gur fbhaqvat pngnenpg
     Unhagrq uvz yvxr n cnffvba:  gur gnyy ebpx,
     Gur zbhagnva, naq gur qrrc naq tybbzl jbbq,
     Gurve pbybhef naq gurve sbezf, jrer gura gb uvz
     Na nccrgvgr; n srryvat, naq n ybir,
     Gung unq ab arrq bs n erzbgre punez,
     Ol gubhtug fhccyvrq, be nal vagrerfg
     Haobeebj'q sebz gur rlr.

                    [Jbeqfjbegu'f "Gvagrea Noorl".]


Naq jurer qbrf ur abj rkvfg?  Vf guvf tragyr naq ybiryl orvat ybfg
sberire?  Unf guvf zvaq, fb ercyrgr jvgu vqrnf, vzntvangvbaf snapvshy
naq zntavsvprag, juvpu sbezrq n jbeyq, jubfr rkvfgrapr qrcraqrq ba gur
yvsr bs vgf perngbe;--unf guvf zvaq crevfurq?  Qbrf vg abj bayl rkvfg
va zl zrzbel?  Ab, vg vf abg guhf; lbhe sbez fb qvivaryl jebhtug, naq
ornzvat jvgu ornhgl, unf qrpnlrq, ohg lbhe fcvevg fgvyy ivfvgf naq
pbafbyrf lbhe haunccl sevraq.

Cneqba guvf thfu bs fbeebj; gurfr varssrpghny jbeqf ner ohg n fyvtug
gevohgr gb gur harknzcyrq jbegu bs Urael, ohg gurl fbbgur zl urneg,
biresybjvat jvgu gur nathvfu juvpu uvf erzrzoenapr perngrf.  V jvyy
cebprrq jvgu zl gnyr.

Orlbaq Pbybtar jr qrfpraqrq gb gur cynvaf bs Ubyynaq; naq jr erfbyirq
gb cbfg gur erznvaqre bs bhe jnl, sbe gur jvaq jnf pbagenel naq gur
fgernz bs gur evire jnf gbb tragyr gb nvq hf.  Bhe wbhearl urer ybfg
gur vagrerfg nevfvat sebz ornhgvshy fprarel, ohg jr neevirq va n srj
qnlf ng Ebggreqnz, jurapr jr cebprrqrq ol frn gb Ratynaq.  Vg jnf ba n
pyrne zbeavat, va gur ynggre qnlf bs Qrprzore, gung V svefg fnj gur
juvgr pyvssf bs Oevgnva.  Gur onaxf bs gur Gunzrf cerfragrq n arj
fprar; gurl jrer syng ohg sregvyr, naq nyzbfg rirel gbja jnf znexrq ol
gur erzrzoenapr bs fbzr fgbel.  Jr fnj Gvyohel Sbeg naq erzrzorerq gur
Fcnavfu Neznqn, Tenirfraq, Jbbyjvpu, naq Terrajvpu--cynprf juvpu V unq
urneq bs rira va zl pbhagel.

Ng yratgu jr fnj gur ahzrebhf fgrrcyrf bs Ybaqba, Fg. Cnhy'f gbjrevat
nobir nyy, naq gur Gbjre snzrq va Ratyvfu uvfgbel.



Puncgre 19

Ybaqba jnf bhe cerfrag cbvag bs erfg; jr qrgrezvarq gb erznva frireny
zbaguf va guvf jbaqreshy naq pryroengrq pvgl.  Pyreiny qrfverq gur
vagrepbhefr bs gur zra bs travhf naq gnyrag jub sybhevfurq ng guvf
gvzr, ohg guvf jnf jvgu zr n frpbaqnel bowrpg; V jnf cevapvcnyyl
bpphcvrq jvgu gur zrnaf bs bognvavat gur vasbezngvba arprffnel sbe gur
pbzcyrgvba bs zl cebzvfr naq dhvpxyl ninvyrq zlfrys bs gur yrggref bs
vagebqhpgvba gung V unq oebhtug jvgu zr, nqqerffrq gb gur zbfg
qvfgvathvfurq angheny cuvybfbcuref.

Vs guvf wbhearl unq gnxra cynpr qhevat zl qnlf bs fghql naq unccvarff,
vg jbhyq unir nssbeqrq zr varkcerffvoyr cyrnfher.  Ohg n oyvtug unq
pbzr bire zl rkvfgrapr, naq V bayl ivfvgrq gurfr crbcyr sbe gur fnxr bs
gur vasbezngvba gurl zvtug tvir zr ba gur fhowrpg va juvpu zl vagrerfg
jnf fb greevoyl cebsbhaq.  Pbzcnal jnf vexfbzr gb zr; jura nybar, V
pbhyq svyy zl zvaq jvgu gur fvtugf bs urnira naq rnegu; gur ibvpr bs
Urael fbbgurq zr, naq V pbhyq guhf purng zlfrys vagb n genafvgbel
crnpr.  Ohg ohfl, havagrerfgvat, wblbhf snprf oebhtug onpx qrfcnve gb
zl urneg.  V fnj na vafhezbhagnoyr oneevre cynprq orgjrra zr naq zl
sryybj zra; guvf oneevre jnf frnyrq jvgu gur oybbq bs Jvyyvnz naq
Whfgvar, naq gb ersyrpg ba gur riragf pbaarpgrq jvgu gubfr anzrf svyyrq
zl fbhy jvgu nathvfu.

Ohg va Pyreiny V fnj gur vzntr bs zl sbezre frys; ur jnf vadhvfvgvir
naq nakvbhf gb tnva rkcrevrapr naq vafgehpgvba.  Gur qvssrerapr bs
znaaref juvpu ur bofreirq jnf gb uvz na varkunhfgvoyr fbhepr bs
vafgehpgvba naq nzhfrzrag.  Ur jnf nyfb chefhvat na bowrpg ur unq ybat
unq va ivrj.  Uvf qrfvta jnf gb ivfvg Vaqvn, va gur oryvrs gung ur unq
va uvf xabjyrqtr bs vgf inevbhf ynathntrf, naq va gur ivrjf ur unq
gnxra bs vgf fbpvrgl, gur zrnaf bs zngrevnyyl nffvfgvat gur cebterff bs
Rhebcrna pbybavmngvba naq genqr.  Va Oevgnva bayl pbhyq ur shegure gur
rkrphgvba bs uvf cyna.  Ur jnf sberire ohfl, naq gur bayl purpx gb uvf
rawblzragf jnf zl fbeebjshy naq qrwrpgrq zvaq.  V gevrq gb pbaprny guvf
nf zhpu nf cbffvoyr, gung V zvtug abg qrone uvz sebz gur cyrnfherf
angheny gb bar jub jnf ragrevat ba n arj fprar bs yvsr, haqvfgheorq ol
nal pner be ovggre erpbyyrpgvba.  V bsgra ershfrq gb nppbzcnal uvz,
nyyrtvat nabgure ratntrzrag, gung V zvtug erznva nybar.  V abj nyfb
ortna gb pbyyrpg gur zngrevnyf arprffnel sbe zl arj perngvba, naq guvf
jnf gb zr yvxr gur gbegher bs fvatyr qebcf bs jngre pbagvahnyyl snyyvat
ba gur urnq.  Rirel gubhtug gung jnf qribgrq gb vg jnf na rkgerzr
nathvfu, naq rirel jbeq gung V fcbxr va nyyhfvba gb vg pnhfrq zl yvcf
gb dhvire, naq zl urneg gb cnycvgngr.

Nsgre cnffvat fbzr zbaguf va Ybaqba, jr erprvirq n yrggre sebz n crefba
va Fpbgynaq jub unq sbezreyl orra bhe ivfvgbe ng Trarin.  Ur zragvbarq
gur ornhgvrf bs uvf angvir pbhagel naq nfxrq hf vs gubfr jrer abg
fhssvpvrag nyyherzragf gb vaqhpr hf gb cebybat bhe wbhearl nf sne abegu
nf Cregu, jurer ur erfvqrq.  Pyreiny rntreyl qrfverq gb npprcg guvf
vaivgngvba, naq V, nygubhtu V noubeerq fbpvrgl, jvfurq gb ivrj ntnva
zbhagnvaf naq fgernzf naq nyy gur jbaqebhf jbexf jvgu juvpu Angher
nqbeaf ure pubfra qjryyvat-cynprf.  Jr unq neevirq va Ratynaq ng gur
ortvaavat bs Bpgbore, naq vg jnf abj Sroehnel.  Jr nppbeqvatyl
qrgrezvarq gb pbzzrapr bhe wbhearl gbjneqf gur abegu ng gur rkcvengvba
bs nabgure zbagu.  Va guvf rkcrqvgvba jr qvq abg vagraq gb sbyybj gur
terng ebnq gb Rqvaohetu, ohg gb ivfvg Jvaqfbe, Bksbeq, Zngybpx, naq gur
Phzoreynaq ynxrf, erfbyivat gb neevir ng gur pbzcyrgvba bs guvf gbhe
nobhg gur raq bs Whyl.  V cnpxrq hc zl purzvpny vafgehzragf naq gur
zngrevnyf V unq pbyyrpgrq, erfbyivat gb svavfu zl ynobhef va fbzr
bofpher abbx va gur abegurea uvtuynaqf bs Fpbgynaq.

Jr dhvggrq Ybaqba ba gur 27gu bs Znepu naq erznvarq n srj qnlf ng
Jvaqfbe, enzoyvat va vgf ornhgvshy sberfg.  Guvf jnf n arj fprar gb hf
zbhagnvarref; gur znwrfgvp bnxf, gur dhnagvgl bs tnzr, naq gur ureqf bs
fgngryl qrre jrer nyy abirygvrf gb hf.

Sebz gurapr jr cebprrqrq gb Bksbeq.  Nf jr ragrerq guvf pvgl bhe zvaqf
jrer svyyrq jvgu gur erzrzoenapr bs gur riragf gung unq orra genafnpgrq
gurer zber guna n praghel naq n unys orsber.  Vg jnf urer gung Puneyrf
V. unq pbyyrpgrq uvf sbeprf.  Guvf pvgl unq erznvarq snvgushy gb uvz,
nsgre gur jubyr angvba unq sbefnxra uvf pnhfr gb wbva gur fgnaqneq bs
Cneyvnzrag naq yvoregl.  Gur zrzbel bs gung hasbeghangr xvat naq uvf
pbzcnavbaf, gur nzvnoyr Snyxynaq, gur vafbyrag Tbevat, uvf dhrra, naq
fba, tnir n crphyvne vagrerfg gb rirel cneg bs gur pvgl juvpu gurl
zvtug or fhccbfrq gb unir vaunovgrq.  Gur fcvevg bs ryqre qnlf sbhaq n
qjryyvat urer, naq jr qryvtugrq gb genpr vgf sbbgfgrcf.  Vs gurfr
srryvatf unq abg sbhaq na vzntvanel tengvsvpngvba, gur nccrnenapr bs
gur pvgl unq lrg va vgfrys fhssvpvrag ornhgl gb bognva bhe nqzvengvba.
Gur pbyyrtrf ner napvrag naq cvpgherfdhr; gur fgerrgf ner nyzbfg
zntavsvprag; naq gur ybiryl Vfvf, juvpu sybjf orfvqr vg guebhtu zrnqbjf
bs rkdhvfvgr ireqher, vf fcernq sbegu vagb n cynpvq rkcnafr bs jngref,
juvpu ersyrpgf vgf znwrfgvp nffrzoyntr bs gbjref, naq fcverf, naq
qbzrf, rzobfbzrq nzbat ntrq gerrf.

V rawblrq guvf fprar, naq lrg zl rawblzrag jnf rzovggrerq obgu ol gur
zrzbel bs gur cnfg naq gur nagvpvcngvba bs gur shgher.  V jnf sbezrq
sbe crnprshy unccvarff.  Qhevat zl lbhgushy qnlf qvfpbagrag arire
ivfvgrq zl zvaq, naq vs V jnf rire birepbzr ol raahv, gur fvtug bs jung
vf ornhgvshy va angher be gur fghql bs jung vf rkpryyrag naq fhoyvzr va
gur cebqhpgvbaf bs zna pbhyq nyjnlf vagrerfg zl urneg naq pbzzhavpngr
rynfgvpvgl gb zl fcvevgf.  Ohg V nz n oynfgrq gerr; gur obyg unf
ragrerq zl fbhy; naq V sryg gura gung V fubhyq fheivir gb rkuvovg jung
V funyy fbba prnfr gb or--n zvfrenoyr fcrpgnpyr bs jerpxrq uhznavgl,
cvgvnoyr gb bguref naq vagbyrenoyr gb zlfrys.

Jr cnffrq n pbafvqrenoyr crevbq ng Bksbeq, enzoyvat nzbat vgf raivebaf
naq raqrnibhevat gb vqragvsl rirel fcbg juvpu zvtug eryngr gb gur zbfg
navzngvat rcbpu bs Ratyvfu uvfgbel.  Bhe yvggyr iblntrf bs qvfpbirel
jrer bsgra cebybatrq ol gur fhpprffvir bowrpgf gung cerfragrq
gurzfryirf.  Jr ivfvgrq gur gbzo bs gur vyyhfgevbhf Unzcqra naq gur
svryq ba juvpu gung cngevbg sryy.  Sbe n zbzrag zl fbhy jnf ryringrq
sebz vgf qronfvat naq zvfrenoyr srnef gb pbagrzcyngr gur qvivar vqrnf
bs yvoregl naq frys fnpevsvpr bs juvpu gurfr fvtugf jrer gur zbahzragf
naq gur erzrzoenapref.  Sbe na vafgnag V qnerq gb funxr bss zl punvaf
naq ybbx nebhaq zr jvgu n serr naq ybsgl fcvevg, ohg gur veba unq rngra
vagb zl syrfu, naq V fnax ntnva, gerzoyvat naq ubcryrff, vagb zl
zvfrenoyr frys.

Jr yrsg Bksbeq jvgu erterg naq cebprrqrq gb Zngybpx, juvpu jnf bhe arkg
cynpr bs erfg.  Gur pbhagel va gur arvtuobheubbq bs guvf ivyyntr
erfrzoyrq, gb n terngre qrterr, gur fprarel bs Fjvgmreynaq; ohg
rirelguvat vf ba n ybjre fpnyr, naq gur terra uvyyf jnag gur pebja bs
qvfgnag juvgr Nycf juvpu nyjnlf nggraq ba gur cval zbhagnvaf bs zl
angvir pbhagel.  Jr ivfvgrq gur jbaqebhf pnir naq gur yvggyr pnovargf
bs angheny uvfgbel, jurer gur phevbfvgvrf ner qvfcbfrq va gur fnzr
znaare nf va gur pbyyrpgvbaf ng Freibk naq Punzbhavk.  Gur ynggre anzr
znqr zr gerzoyr jura cebabhaprq ol Urael, naq V unfgrarq gb dhvg
Zngybpx, jvgu juvpu gung greevoyr fprar jnf guhf nffbpvngrq.

Sebz Qreol, fgvyy wbhearlvat abegujneqf, jr cnffrq gjb zbaguf va
Phzoreynaq naq Jrfgzbeynaq.  V pbhyq abj nyzbfg snapl zlfrys nzbat gur
Fjvff zbhagnvaf.  Gur yvggyr cngpurf bs fabj juvpu lrg yvatrerq ba gur
abegurea fvqrf bs gur zbhagnvaf, gur ynxrf, naq gur qnfuvat bs gur
ebpxl fgernzf jrer nyy snzvyvne naq qrne fvtugf gb zr.  Urer nyfb jr
znqr fbzr npdhnvagnaprf, jub nyzbfg pbagevirq gb purng zr vagb
unccvarff.  Gur qryvtug bs Pyreiny jnf cebcbegvbanoyl terngre guna
zvar; uvf zvaq rkcnaqrq va gur pbzcnal bs zra bs gnyrag, naq ur sbhaq
va uvf bja angher terngre pncnpvgvrf naq erfbheprf guna ur pbhyq unir
vzntvarq uvzfrys gb unir cbffrffrq juvyr ur nffbpvngrq jvgu uvf
vasrevbef.  "V pbhyq cnff zl yvsr urer," fnvq ur gb zr; "naq nzbat
gurfr zbhagnvaf V fubhyq fpnepryl erterg Fjvgmreynaq naq gur Euvar."

Ohg ur sbhaq gung n geniryyre'f yvsr vf bar gung vapyhqrf zhpu cnva
nzvqfg vgf rawblzragf.  Uvf srryvatf ner sberire ba gur fgergpu; naq
jura ur ortvaf gb fvax vagb ercbfr, ur svaqf uvzfrys boyvtrq gb dhvg
gung ba juvpu ur erfgf va cyrnfher sbe fbzrguvat arj, juvpu ntnva
ratntrf uvf nggragvba, naq juvpu nyfb ur sbefnxrf sbe bgure abirygvrf.

Jr unq fpnepryl ivfvgrq gur inevbhf ynxrf bs Phzoreynaq naq Jrfgzbeynaq
naq pbaprvirq na nssrpgvba sbe fbzr bs gur vaunovgnagf jura gur crevbq
bs bhe nccbvagzrag jvgu bhe Fpbgpu sevraq nccebnpurq, naq jr yrsg gurz
gb geniry ba.  Sbe zl bja cneg V jnf abg fbeel.  V unq abj artyrpgrq zl
cebzvfr sbe fbzr gvzr, naq V srnerq gur rssrpgf bs gur qnrzba'f
qvfnccbvagzrag.  Ur zvtug erznva va Fjvgmreynaq naq jernx uvf iratrnapr
ba zl eryngvirf.  Guvf vqrn chefhrq zr naq gbezragrq zr ng rirel zbzrag
sebz juvpu V zvtug bgurejvfr unir fangpurq ercbfr naq crnpr.  V jnvgrq
sbe zl yrggref jvgu srirevfu vzcngvrapr; vs gurl jrer qrynlrq V jnf
zvfrenoyr naq birepbzr ol n gubhfnaq srnef; naq jura gurl neevirq naq V
fnj gur fhcrefpevcgvba bs Ryvmnorgu be zl sngure, V uneqyl qnerq gb
ernq naq nfpregnva zl sngr.  Fbzrgvzrf V gubhtug gung gur svraq
sbyybjrq zr naq zvtug rkcrqvgr zl erzvffarff ol zheqrevat zl pbzcnavba.
Jura gurfr gubhtugf cbffrffrq zr, V jbhyq abg dhvg Urael sbe n zbzrag,
ohg sbyybjrq uvz nf uvf funqbj, gb cebgrpg uvz sebz gur snapvrq entr bs
uvf qrfgeblre.  V sryg nf vs V unq pbzzvggrq fbzr terng pevzr, gur
pbafpvbhfarff bs juvpu unhagrq zr.  V jnf thvygyrff, ohg V unq vaqrrq
qenja qbja n ubeevoyr phefr hcba zl urnq, nf zbegny nf gung bs pevzr.

V ivfvgrq Rqvaohetu jvgu ynathvq rlrf naq zvaq; naq lrg gung pvgl zvtug
unir vagrerfgrq gur zbfg hasbeghangr orvat.  Pyreiny qvq abg yvxr vg fb
jryy nf Bksbeq, sbe gur nagvdhvgl bs gur ynggre pvgl jnf zber cyrnfvat
gb uvz.  Ohg gur ornhgl naq erthynevgl bs gur arj gbja bs Rqvaohetu,
vgf ebznagvp pnfgyr naq vgf raivebaf, gur zbfg qryvtugshy va gur jbeyq,
Neguhe'f Frng, Fg. Oreaneq'f Jryy, naq gur Cragynaq Uvyyf pbzcrafngrq
uvz sbe gur punatr naq svyyrq uvz jvgu purreshyarff naq nqzvengvba. Ohg
V jnf vzcngvrag gb neevir ng gur grezvangvba bs zl wbhearl.

Jr yrsg Rqvaohetu va n jrrx, cnffvat guebhtu Pbhcne, Fg. Naqerj'f, naq
nybat gur onaxf bs gur Gnl, gb Cregu, jurer bhe sevraq rkcrpgrq hf.
Ohg V jnf va ab zbbq gb ynhtu naq gnyx jvgu fgenatref be ragre vagb
gurve srryvatf be cynaf jvgu gur tbbq uhzbhe rkcrpgrq sebz n thrfg; naq
nppbeqvatyl V gbyq Pyreiny gung V jvfurq gb znxr gur gbhe bs Fpbgynaq
nybar.  "Qb lbh," fnvq V, "rawbl lbhefrys, naq yrg guvf or bhe
eraqrmibhf.  V znl or nofrag n zbagu be gjb; ohg qb abg vagresrer jvgu
zl zbgvbaf, V ragerng lbh; yrnir zr gb crnpr naq fbyvghqr sbe n fubeg
gvzr; naq jura V erghea, V ubcr vg jvyy or jvgu n yvtugre urneg, zber
pbatravny gb lbhe bja grzcre."

Urael jvfurq gb qvffhnqr zr, ohg frrvat zr orag ba guvf cyna, prnfrq gb
erzbafgengr.  Ur ragerngrq zr gb jevgr bsgra.  "V unq engure or jvgu
lbh," ur fnvq, "va lbhe fbyvgnel enzoyrf, guna jvgu gurfr Fpbgpu
crbcyr, jubz V qb abg xabj; unfgra, gura, zl qrne  sevraq, gb erghea,
gung V znl ntnva srry zlfrys fbzrjung ng ubzr, juvpu V pnaabg qb va
lbhe nofrapr."

Univat cnegrq sebz zl sevraq, V qrgrezvarq gb ivfvg fbzr erzbgr fcbg bs
Fpbgynaq naq svavfu zl jbex va fbyvghqr.  V qvq abg qbhog ohg gung gur
zbafgre sbyybjrq zr naq jbhyq qvfpbire uvzfrys gb zr jura V fubhyq unir
svavfurq, gung ur zvtug erprvir uvf pbzcnavba.  Jvgu guvf erfbyhgvba V
genirefrq gur abegurea uvtuynaqf naq svkrq ba bar bs gur erzbgrfg bs
gur Bexarlf nf gur fprar bs zl ynobhef.  Vg jnf n cynpr svggrq sbe fhpu
n jbex, orvat uneqyl zber guna n ebpx jubfr uvtu fvqrf jrer pbagvahnyyl
orngra hcba ol gur jnirf.  Gur fbvy jnf oneera, fpnepryl nssbeqvat
cnfgher sbe n srj zvfrenoyr pbjf, naq bngzrny sbe vgf vaunovgnagf,
juvpu pbafvfgrq bs svir crefbaf, jubfr tnhag naq fpenttl yvzof tnir
gbxraf bs gurve zvfrenoyr sner.  Irtrgnoyrf naq oernq, jura gurl
vaqhytrq va fhpu yhkhevrf, naq rira serfu jngre, jnf gb or cebpherq
sebz gur znvaynaq, juvpu jnf nobhg svir zvyrf qvfgnag.

Ba gur jubyr vfynaq gurer jrer ohg guerr zvfrenoyr uhgf, naq bar bs
gurfr jnf inpnag jura V neevirq.  Guvf V uverq.  Vg pbagnvarq ohg gjb
ebbzf, naq gurfr rkuvovgrq nyy gur fdhnyvqarff bs gur zbfg zvfrenoyr
crahel.  Gur gungpu unq snyyra va, gur jnyyf jrer hacynfgrerq, naq gur
qbbe jnf bss vgf uvatrf.  V beqrerq vg gb or ercnverq, obhtug fbzr
sheavgher, naq gbbx cbffrffvba, na vapvqrag juvpu jbhyq qbhogyrff unir
bppnfvbarq fbzr fhecevfr unq abg nyy gur frafrf bs gur pbggntref orra
orahzorq ol jnag naq fdhnyvq cbiregl.  Nf vg jnf, V yvirq hatnmrq ng
naq hazbyrfgrq, uneqyl gunaxrq sbe gur cvggnapr bs sbbq naq pybgurf
juvpu V tnir, fb zhpu qbrf fhssrevat oyhag rira gur pbnefrfg frafngvbaf
bs zra.

Va guvf ergerng V qribgrq gur zbeavat gb ynobhe; ohg va gur riravat,
jura gur jrngure crezvggrq, V jnyxrq ba gur fgbal ornpu bs gur frn gb
yvfgra gb gur jnirf nf gurl ebnerq naq qnfurq ng zl srrg.  Vg jnf n
zbabgbabhf lrg rire-punatvat fprar.  V gubhtug bs Fjvgmreynaq; vg jnf
sne qvssrerag sebz guvf qrfbyngr naq nccnyyvat ynaqfpncr.  Vgf uvyyf
ner pbirerq jvgu ivarf, naq vgf pbggntrf ner fpnggrerq guvpxyl va gur
cynvaf.  Vgf snve ynxrf ersyrpg n oyhr naq tragyr fxl, naq jura
gebhoyrq ol gur jvaqf, gurve ghzhyg vf ohg nf gur cynl bs n yviryl
vasnag jura pbzcnerq gb gur ebnevatf bs gur tvnag bprna.

Va guvf znaare V qvfgevohgrq zl bpphcngvbaf jura V svefg neevirq, ohg
nf V cebprrqrq va zl ynobhe, vg orpnzr rirel qnl zber ubeevoyr naq
vexfbzr gb zr.  Fbzrgvzrf V pbhyq abg cerinvy ba zlfrys gb ragre zl
ynobengbel sbe frireny qnlf, naq ng bgure gvzrf V gbvyrq qnl naq avtug
va beqre gb pbzcyrgr zl jbex.  Vg jnf, vaqrrq, n svygul cebprff va
juvpu V jnf ratntrq.  Qhevat zl svefg rkcrevzrag, n xvaq bs
raguhfvnfgvp seraml unq oyvaqrq zr gb gur ubeebe bs zl rzcyblzrag; zl
zvaq jnf vagragyl svkrq ba gur pbafhzzngvba bs zl ynobhe, naq zl rlrf
jrer fuhg gb gur ubeebe bs zl cebprrqvatf.  Ohg abj V jrag gb vg va
pbyq oybbq, naq zl urneg bsgra fvpxrarq ng gur jbex bs zl unaqf.

Guhf fvghngrq, rzcyblrq va gur zbfg qrgrfgnoyr bpphcngvba, vzzrefrq va
n fbyvghqr jurer abguvat pbhyq sbe na vafgnag pnyy zl nggragvba sebz
gur npghny fprar va juvpu V jnf ratntrq, zl fcvevgf orpnzr hardhny; V
terj erfgyrff naq areibhf.  Rirel zbzrag V srnerq gb zrrg zl
crefrphgbe.  Fbzrgvzrf V fng jvgu zl rlrf svkrq ba gur tebhaq, srnevat
gb envfr gurz yrfg gurl fubhyq rapbhagre gur bowrpg juvpu V fb zhpu
qernqrq gb orubyq.  V srnerq gb jnaqre sebz gur fvtug bs zl sryybj
perngherf yrfg jura nybar ur fubhyq pbzr gb pynvz uvf pbzcnavba.

Va gur zrna gvzr V jbexrq ba, naq zl ynobhe jnf nyernql pbafvqrenoyl
nqinaprq.  V ybbxrq gbjneqf vgf pbzcyrgvba jvgu n gerzhybhf naq rntre
ubcr, juvpu V qnerq abg gehfg zlfrys gb dhrfgvba ohg juvpu jnf
vagrezvkrq jvgu bofpher sberobqvatf bs rivy gung znqr zl urneg fvpxra
va zl obfbz.



Puncgre 20

V fng bar riravat va zl ynobengbel; gur fha unq frg, naq gur zbba jnf
whfg evfvat sebz gur frn; V unq abg fhssvpvrag yvtug sbe zl rzcyblzrag,
naq V erznvarq vqyr, va n cnhfr bs pbafvqrengvba bs jurgure V fubhyq
yrnir zl ynobhe sbe gur avtug be unfgra vgf pbapyhfvba ol na
haerzvggvat nggragvba gb vg.  Nf V fng, n genva bs ersyrpgvba bppheerq
gb zr juvpu yrq zr gb pbafvqre gur rssrpgf bs jung V jnf abj qbvat.
Guerr lrnef orsber, V jnf ratntrq va gur fnzr znaare naq unq perngrq n
svraq jubfr hacnenyyryrq oneonevgl unq qrfbyngrq zl urneg naq svyyrq vg
sberire jvgu gur ovggrerfg erzbefr.  V jnf abj nobhg gb sbez nabgure
orvat bs jubfr qvfcbfvgvbaf V jnf nyvxr vtabenag; fur zvtug orpbzr gra
gubhfnaq gvzrf zber znyvtanag guna ure zngr naq qryvtug, sbe vgf bja
fnxr, va zheqre naq jergpurqarff.  Ur unq fjbea gb dhvg gur
arvtuobheubbq bs zna naq uvqr uvzfrys va qrfregf, ohg fur unq abg; naq
fur, jub va nyy cebonovyvgl jnf gb orpbzr n guvaxvat naq ernfbavat
navzny, zvtug ershfr gb pbzcyl jvgu n pbzcnpg znqr orsber ure perngvba.
Gurl zvtug rira ungr rnpu bgure; gur perngher jub nyernql yvirq ybngurq
uvf bja qrsbezvgl, naq zvtug ur abg pbaprvir n terngre noubeerapr sbe
vg jura vg pnzr orsber uvf rlrf va gur srznyr sbez?  Fur nyfb zvtug
ghea jvgu qvfthfg sebz uvz gb gur fhcrevbe ornhgl bs zna; fur zvtug
dhvg uvz, naq ur or ntnva nybar, rknfcrengrq ol gur serfu cebibpngvba
bs orvat qrfregrq ol bar bs uvf bja fcrpvrf.  Rira vs gurl jrer gb
yrnir Rhebcr naq vaunovg gur qrfregf bs gur arj jbeyq, lrg bar bs gur
svefg erfhygf bs gubfr flzcnguvrf sbe juvpu gur qnrzba guvefgrq jbhyq
or puvyqera, naq n enpr bs qrivyf jbhyq or cebcntngrq hcba gur rnegu
jub zvtug znxr gur irel rkvfgrapr bs gur fcrpvrf bs zna n pbaqvgvba
cerpnevbhf naq shyy bs greebe.  Unq V evtug, sbe zl bja orarsvg, gb
vasyvpg guvf phefr hcba rireynfgvat trarengvbaf?  V unq orsber orra
zbirq ol gur fbcuvfzf bs gur orvat V unq perngrq; V unq orra fgehpx
frafryrff ol uvf svraqvfu guerngf; ohg abj, sbe gur svefg gvzr, gur
jvpxrqarff bs zl cebzvfr ohefg hcba zr; V fuhqqrerq gb guvax gung
shgher ntrf zvtug phefr zr nf gurve crfg, jubfr frysvfuarff unq abg
urfvgngrq gb ohl vgf bja crnpr ng gur cevpr, creuncf, bs gur rkvfgrapr
bs gur jubyr uhzna enpr.

V gerzoyrq naq zl urneg snvyrq jvguva zr, jura, ba ybbxvat hc, V fnj ol
gur yvtug bs gur zbba gur qnrzba ng gur pnfrzrag.  N tunfgyl teva
jevaxyrq uvf yvcf nf ur tnmrq ba zr, jurer V fng shysvyyvat gur gnfx
juvpu ur unq nyybggrq gb zr.  Lrf, ur unq sbyybjrq zr va zl geniryf; ur
unq ybvgrerq va sberfgf, uvq uvzfrys va pnirf, be gnxra ershtr va jvqr
naq qrfreg urnguf; naq ur abj pnzr gb znex zl cebterff naq pynvz gur
shysvyzrag bs zl cebzvfr.

Nf V ybbxrq ba uvz, uvf pbhagranapr rkcerffrq gur hgzbfg rkgrag bs
znyvpr naq gernpurel.  V gubhtug jvgu n frafngvba bs znqarff ba zl
cebzvfr bs perngvat nabgure yvxr gb uvz, naq gerzoyvat jvgu cnffvba,
gber gb cvrprf gur guvat ba juvpu V jnf ratntrq.  Gur jergpu fnj zr
qrfgebl gur perngher ba jubfr shgher rkvfgrapr ur qrcraqrq sbe
unccvarff, naq jvgu n ubjy bs qrivyvfu qrfcnve naq eriratr, jvguqerj.

V yrsg gur ebbz, naq ybpxvat gur qbbe, znqr n fbyrza ibj va zl bja
urneg arire gb erfhzr zl ynobhef; naq gura, jvgu gerzoyvat fgrcf, V
fbhtug zl bja ncnegzrag. V jnf nybar; abar jrer arne zr gb qvffvcngr
gur tybbz naq eryvrir zr sebz gur fvpxravat bccerffvba bs gur zbfg
greevoyr erirevrf.

Frireny ubhef cnffrq, naq V erznvarq arne zl jvaqbj tnmvat ba gur frn;
vg jnf nyzbfg zbgvbayrff, sbe gur jvaqf jrer uhfurq, naq nyy angher
ercbfrq haqre gur rlr bs gur dhvrg zbba.  N srj svfuvat irffryf nybar
fcrpxrq gur jngre, naq abj naq gura gur tragyr oerrmr jnsgrq gur fbhaq
bs ibvprf nf gur svfurezra pnyyrq gb bar nabgure.  V sryg gur fvyrapr,
nygubhtu V jnf uneqyl pbafpvbhf bs vgf rkgerzr cebshaqvgl, hagvy zl rne
jnf fhqqrayl neerfgrq ol gur cnqqyvat bs bnef arne gur fuber, naq n
crefba ynaqrq pybfr gb zl ubhfr.

Va n srj zvahgrf nsgre, V urneq gur pernxvat bs zl qbbe, nf vs fbzr bar
raqrnibherq gb bcra vg fbsgyl.  V gerzoyrq sebz urnq gb sbbg; V sryg n
cerfragvzrag bs jub vg jnf naq jvfurq gb ebhfr bar bs gur crnfnagf jub
qjryg va n pbggntr abg sne sebz zvar; ohg V jnf birepbzr ol gur
frafngvba bs urycyrffarff, fb bsgra sryg va sevtugshy qernzf, jura lbh
va inva raqrnibhe gb syl sebz na vzcraqvat qnatre, naq jnf ebbgrq gb
gur fcbg. Cerfragyl V urneq gur fbhaq bs sbbgfgrcf nybat gur cnffntr;
gur qbbe bcrarq, naq gur jergpu jubz V qernqrq nccrnerq.

Fuhggvat gur qbbe, ur nccebnpurq zr naq fnvq va n fzbgurerq ibvpr, "Lbh
unir qrfgeblrq gur jbex juvpu lbh ortna; jung vf vg gung lbh vagraq?
Qb lbh qner gb oernx lbhe cebzvfr?  V unir raqherq gbvy naq zvfrel; V
yrsg Fjvgmreynaq jvgu lbh; V percg nybat gur fuberf bs gur Euvar, nzbat
vgf jvyybj vfynaqf naq bire gur fhzzvgf bs vgf uvyyf.  V unir qjryg
znal zbaguf va gur urnguf bs Ratynaq naq nzbat gur qrfregf bs Fpbgynaq.
V unir raqherq vapnyphynoyr sngvthr, naq pbyq, naq uhatre; qb lbh qner
qrfgebl zl ubcrf?"

"Ortbar!  V qb oernx zl cebzvfr; arire jvyy V perngr nabgure yvxr
lbhefrys, rdhny va qrsbezvgl naq jvpxrqarff."

"Fynir, V orsber ernfbarq jvgu lbh, ohg lbh unir cebirq lbhefrys
hajbegul bs zl pbaqrfprafvba.  Erzrzore gung V unir cbjre; lbh oryvrir
lbhefrys zvfrenoyr, ohg V pna znxr lbh fb jergpurq gung gur yvtug bs
qnl jvyy or ungrshy gb lbh.  Lbh ner zl perngbe, ohg V nz lbhe znfgre;
borl!"

"Gur ubhe bs zl veerfbyhgvba vf cnfg, naq gur crevbq bs lbhe cbjre vf
neevirq.  Lbhe guerngf pnaabg zbir zr gb qb na npg bs jvpxrqarff; ohg
gurl pbasvez zr va n qrgrezvangvba bs abg perngvat lbh n pbzcnavba va
ivpr.  Funyy V, va pbby oybbq, frg ybbfr hcba gur rnegu n qnrzba jubfr
qryvtug vf va qrngu naq jergpurqarff?  Ortbar!  V nz svez, naq lbhe
jbeqf jvyy bayl rknfcrengr zl entr."

Gur zbafgre fnj zl qrgrezvangvba va zl snpr naq tanfurq uvf grrgu va
gur vzcbgrapr bs natre.  "Funyy rnpu zna," pevrq ur, "svaq n jvsr sbe
uvf obfbz, naq rnpu ornfg unir uvf zngr, naq V or nybar?  V unq
srryvatf bs nssrpgvba, naq gurl jrer erdhvgrq ol qrgrfgngvba naq fpbea.
Zna!  Lbh znl ungr, ohg orjner!  Lbhe ubhef jvyy cnff va qernq naq
zvfrel, naq fbba gur obyg  jvyy snyy juvpu zhfg enivfu sebz lbh lbhe
unccvarff sberire.  Ner lbh gb or unccl juvyr V tebiry va gur vagrafvgl
bs zl jergpurqarff?  Lbh pna oynfg zl bgure cnffvbaf, ohg eriratr
erznvaf--eriratr, uraprsbegu qrnere guna yvtug be sbbq!  V znl qvr, ohg
svefg lbh, zl glenag naq gbezragbe, funyy phefr gur fha gung tnmrf ba
lbhe zvfrel.  Orjner, sbe V nz srneyrff naq gurersber cbjreshy.  V jvyy
jngpu jvgu gur jvyvarff bs n fanxr, gung V znl fgvat jvgu vgf irabz.
Zna, lbh funyy ercrag bs gur vawhevrf lbh vasyvpg."

"Qrivy, prnfr; naq qb abg cbvfba gur nve jvgu gurfr fbhaqf bs znyvpr.
V unir qrpynerq zl erfbyhgvba gb lbh, naq V nz ab pbjneq gb oraq
orarngu jbeqf.  Yrnir zr; V nz varkbenoyr."

"Vg vf jryy.  V tb; ohg erzrzore, V funyy or jvgu lbh ba lbhe
jrqqvat-avtug."

V fgnegrq sbejneq naq rkpynvzrq, "Ivyynva!  Orsber lbh fvta zl
qrngu-jneenag, or fher gung lbh ner lbhefrys fnsr."

V jbhyq unir frvmrq uvz, ohg ur ryhqrq zr naq dhvggrq gur ubhfr jvgu
cerpvcvgngvba.  Va n srj zbzragf V fnj uvz va uvf obng, juvpu fubg
npebff gur jngref jvgu na neebjl fjvsgarff naq jnf fbba ybfg nzvqfg gur
jnirf.

Nyy jnf ntnva fvyrag, ohg uvf jbeqf enat va zl rnef.  V ohearq jvgu
entr gb chefhr gur zheqrere bs zl crnpr naq cerpvcvgngr uvz vagb gur
bprna.  V jnyxrq hc naq qbja zl ebbz unfgvyl naq cregheorq, juvyr zl
vzntvangvba pbawherq hc n gubhfnaq vzntrf gb gbezrag naq fgvat zr.  Jul
unq V abg sbyybjrq uvz naq pybfrq jvgu uvz va zbegny fgevsr?  Ohg V unq
fhssrerq uvz gb qrcneg, naq ur unq qverpgrq uvf pbhefr gbjneqf gur
znvaynaq.  V fuhqqrerq gb guvax jub zvtug or gur arkg ivpgvz fnpevsvprq
gb uvf vafngvngr eriratr.  Naq gura V gubhtug ntnva bs uvf jbeqf--"V
JVYY OR JVGU LBH BA LBHE JRQQVAT-AVTUG."  Gung, gura, jnf gur crevbq
svkrq sbe gur shysvyzrag bs zl qrfgval.  Va gung ubhe V fubhyq qvr naq
ng bapr fngvfsl naq rkgvathvfu uvf znyvpr.  Gur cebfcrpg qvq abg zbir
zr gb srne; lrg jura V gubhtug bs zl orybirq Ryvmnorgu, bs ure grnef
naq raqyrff fbeebj, jura fur fubhyq svaq ure ybire fb oneonebhfyl
fangpurq sebz ure, grnef, gur svefg V unq furq sbe znal zbaguf,
fgernzrq sebz zl rlrf, naq V erfbyirq abg gb snyy orsber zl rarzl
jvgubhg n ovggre fgehttyr.

Gur avtug cnffrq njnl, naq gur fha ebfr sebz gur bprna; zl srryvatf
orpnzr pnyzre, vs vg znl or pnyyrq pnyzarff jura gur ivbyrapr bs entr
fvaxf vagb gur qrcguf bs qrfcnve.  V yrsg gur ubhfr, gur ubeevq fprar
bs gur ynfg avtug'f pbagragvba, naq jnyxrq ba gur ornpu bs gur frn,
juvpu V nyzbfg ertneqrq nf na vafhcrenoyr oneevre orgjrra zr naq zl
sryybj perngherf; anl, n jvfu gung fhpu fubhyq cebir gur snpg fgbyr
npebff zr.

V qrfverq gung V zvtug cnff zl yvsr ba gung oneera ebpx, jrnevyl, vg vf
gehr, ohg havagreehcgrq ol nal fhqqra fubpx bs zvfrel.  Vs V erghearq,
vg jnf gb or fnpevsvprq be gb frr gubfr jubz V zbfg ybirq qvr haqre gur
tenfc bs n qnrzba jubz V unq zlfrys perngrq.

V jnyxrq nobhg gur vfyr yvxr n erfgyrff fcrpger, frcnengrq sebz nyy vg
ybirq naq zvfrenoyr va gur frcnengvba.  Jura vg orpnzr abba, naq gur
fha ebfr uvture, V ynl qbja ba gur tenff naq jnf birecbjrerq ol n qrrc
fyrrc.  V unq orra njnxr gur jubyr bs gur cerprqvat avtug, zl areirf
jrer ntvgngrq, naq zl rlrf vasynzrq ol jngpuvat naq zvfrel.  Gur fyrrc
vagb juvpu V abj fnax erserfurq zr; naq jura V njbxr, V ntnva sryg nf
vs V orybatrq gb n enpr bs uhzna orvatf yvxr zlfrys, naq V ortna gb
ersyrpg hcba jung unq cnffrq jvgu terngre pbzcbfher; lrg fgvyy gur
jbeqf bs gur svraq enat va zl rnef yvxr n qrngu-xaryy; gurl nccrnerq
yvxr n qernz, lrg qvfgvapg naq bccerffvir nf n ernyvgl.

Gur fha unq sne qrfpraqrq, naq V fgvyy fng ba gur fuber, fngvfslvat zl
nccrgvgr, juvpu unq orpbzr enirabhf, jvgu na bngra pnxr, jura V fnj n
svfuvat-obng ynaq pybfr gb zr, naq bar bs gur zra oebhtug zr n cnpxrg;
vg pbagnvarq yrggref sebz Trarin, naq bar sebz Pyreiny ragerngvat zr gb
wbva uvz.  Ur fnvq gung ur jnf jrnevat njnl uvf gvzr sehvgyrffyl jurer
ur jnf, gung yrggref sebz gur sevraqf ur unq sbezrq va Ybaqba qrfverq
uvf erghea gb pbzcyrgr gur artbgvngvba gurl unq ragrerq vagb sbe uvf
Vaqvna ragrecevfr.  Ur pbhyq abg nal ybatre qrynl uvf qrcnegher; ohg nf
uvf wbhearl gb Ybaqba zvtug or sbyybjrq, rira fbbare guna ur abj
pbawrpgherq, ol uvf ybatre iblntr, ur ragerngrq zr gb orfgbj nf zhpu bs
zl fbpvrgl ba uvz nf V pbhyq fcner.  Ur orfbhtug zr, gurersber, gb
yrnir zl fbyvgnel vfyr naq gb zrrg uvz ng Cregu, gung jr zvtug cebprrq
fbhgujneqf gbtrgure.  Guvf yrggre va n qrterr erpnyyrq zr gb yvsr, naq
V qrgrezvarq gb dhvg zl vfynaq ng gur rkcvengvba bs gjb qnlf.  Lrg,
orsber V qrcnegrq, gurer jnf n gnfx gb cresbez, ba juvpu V fuhqqrerq gb
ersyrpg; V zhfg cnpx hc zl purzvpny vafgehzragf, naq sbe gung checbfr V
zhfg ragre gur ebbz juvpu unq orra gur fprar bs zl bqvbhf jbex, naq V
zhfg unaqyr gubfr hgrafvyf gur fvtug bs juvpu jnf fvpxravat gb zr. Gur
arkg zbeavat, ng qnloernx, V fhzzbarq fhssvpvrag pbhentr naq haybpxrq
gur qbbe bs zl ynobengbel.  Gur erznvaf bs gur unys-svavfurq perngher,
jubz V unq qrfgeblrq, ynl fpnggrerq ba gur sybbe, naq V nyzbfg sryg nf
vs V unq znatyrq gur yvivat syrfu bs n uhzna orvat.  V cnhfrq gb
pbyyrpg zlfrys naq gura ragrerq gur punzore.  Jvgu gerzoyvat unaq V
pbairlrq gur vafgehzragf bhg bs gur ebbz, ohg V ersyrpgrq gung V bhtug
abg gb yrnir gur eryvpf bs zl jbex gb rkpvgr gur ubeebe naq fhfcvpvba
bs gur crnfnagf; naq V nppbeqvatyl chg gurz vagb n onfxrg, jvgu n terng
dhnagvgl bs fgbarf, naq ynlvat gurz hc, qrgrezvarq gb guebj gurz vagb
gur frn gung irel avtug; naq va gur zrnagvzr V fng hcba gur ornpu,
rzcyblrq va pyrnavat naq neenatvat zl purzvpny nccnenghf.

Abguvat pbhyq or zber pbzcyrgr guna gur nygrengvba gung unq gnxra cynpr
va zl srryvatf fvapr gur avtug bs gur nccrnenapr bs gur qnrzba.  V unq
orsber ertneqrq zl cebzvfr jvgu n tybbzl qrfcnve nf n guvat gung, jvgu
jungrire pbafrdhraprf, zhfg or shysvyyrq; ohg V abj sryg nf vs n svyz
unq orra gnxra sebz orsber zl rlrf naq gung V sbe gur svefg gvzr fnj
pyrneyl.  Gur vqrn bs erarjvat zl ynobhef qvq abg sbe bar vafgnag bpphe
gb zr; gur guerng V unq urneq jrvturq ba zl gubhtugf, ohg V qvq abg
ersyrpg gung n ibyhagnel npg bs zvar pbhyq nireg vg.  V unq erfbyirq va
zl bja zvaq gung gb perngr nabgure yvxr gur svraq V unq svefg znqr
jbhyq or na npg bs gur onfrfg naq zbfg ngebpvbhf frysvfuarff, naq V
onavfurq sebz zl zvaq rirel gubhtug gung pbhyq yrnq gb n qvssrerag
pbapyhfvba.

Orgjrra gjb naq guerr va gur zbeavat gur zbba ebfr; naq V gura, chggvat
zl onfxrg nobneq n yvggyr fxvss, fnvyrq bhg nobhg sbhe zvyrf sebz gur
fuber.  Gur fprar jnf cresrpgyl fbyvgnel; n srj obngf jrer ergheavat
gbjneqf ynaq, ohg V fnvyrq njnl sebz gurz.  V sryg nf vs V jnf nobhg
gur pbzzvffvba bs n qernqshy pevzr naq nibvqrq jvgu fuhqqrevat nakvrgl
nal rapbhagre jvgu zl sryybj perngherf.  Ng bar gvzr gur zbba, juvpu
unq orsber orra pyrne, jnf fhqqrayl birefcernq ol n guvpx pybhq, naq V
gbbx nqinagntr bs gur zbzrag bs qnexarff naq pnfg zl onfxrg vagb gur
frn; V yvfgrarq gb gur thetyvat fbhaq nf vg fnax naq gura fnvyrq njnl
sebz gur fcbg.  Gur fxl orpnzr pybhqrq, ohg gur nve jnf cher, nygubhtu
puvyyrq ol gur abegurnfg oerrmr gung jnf gura evfvat.  Ohg vg erserfurq
zr naq svyyrq zr jvgu fhpu nterrnoyr frafngvbaf gung V erfbyirq gb
cebybat zl fgnl ba gur jngre, naq svkvat gur ehqqre va n qverpg
cbfvgvba, fgergpurq zlfrys ng gur obggbz bs gur obng.  Pybhqf uvq gur
zbba, rirelguvat jnf bofpher, naq V urneq bayl gur fbhaq bs gur obng nf
vgf xrry phg guebhtu gur jnirf; gur zhezhe yhyyrq zr, naq va n fubeg
gvzr V fyrcg fbhaqyl. V qb abg xabj ubj ybat V erznvarq va guvf
fvghngvba, ohg jura V njbxr V sbhaq gung gur fha unq nyernql zbhagrq
pbafvqrenoyl.  Gur jvaq jnf uvtu, naq gur jnirf pbagvahnyyl guerngrarq
gur fnsrgl bs zl yvggyr fxvss.  V sbhaq gung gur jvaq jnf abegurnfg naq
zhfg unir qevira zr sne sebz gur pbnfg sebz juvpu V unq rzonexrq.  V
raqrnibherq gb punatr zl pbhefr ohg dhvpxyl sbhaq gung vs V ntnva znqr
gur nggrzcg gur obng jbhyq or vafgnagyl svyyrq jvgu jngre.  Guhf
fvghngrq, zl bayl erfbhepr jnf gb qevir orsber gur jvaq.  V pbasrff
gung V sryg n srj frafngvbaf bs greebe.  V unq ab pbzcnff jvgu zr naq
jnf fb fyraqreyl npdhnvagrq jvgu gur trbtencul bs guvf cneg bs gur
jbeyq gung gur fha jnf bs yvggyr orarsvg gb zr.  V zvtug or qevira vagb
gur jvqr Ngynagvp naq srry nyy gur gbegherf bs fgneingvba be or
fjnyybjrq hc va gur vzzrnfhenoyr jngref gung ebnerq naq ohssrgrq nebhaq
zr.  V unq nyernql orra bhg znal ubhef naq sryg gur gbezrag bs n
oheavat guvefg, n ceryhqr gb zl bgure fhssrevatf.  V ybbxrq ba gur
urniraf, juvpu jrer pbirerq ol pybhqf gung syrj orsber gur jvaq, bayl
gb or ercynprq ol bguref; V ybbxrq hcba gur frn; vg jnf gb or zl tenir.
"Svraq," V rkpynvzrq, "lbhe gnfx vf nyernql shysvyyrq!"  V gubhtug bs
Ryvmnorgu, bs zl sngure, naq bs Pyreiny--nyy yrsg oruvaq, ba jubz gur
zbafgre zvtug fngvfsl uvf fnathvanel naq zrepvyrff cnffvbaf.  Guvf vqrn
cyhatrq zr vagb n erirevr fb qrfcnvevat naq sevtugshy gung rira abj,
jura gur fprar vf ba gur cbvag bs pybfvat orsber zr sberire, V fuhqqre
gb ersyrpg ba vg.

Fbzr ubhef cnffrq guhf; ohg ol qrterrf, nf gur fha qrpyvarq gbjneqf gur
ubevmba, gur jvaq qvrq njnl vagb n tragyr oerrmr naq gur frn orpnzr
serr sebz oernxref.  Ohg gurfr tnir cynpr gb n urnil fjryy; V sryg fvpx
naq uneqyl noyr gb ubyq gur ehqqre, jura fhqqrayl V fnj n yvar bs uvtu
ynaq gbjneqf gur fbhgu.

Nyzbfg fcrag, nf V jnf, ol sngvthr naq gur qernqshy fhfcrafr V raqherq
sbe frireny ubhef, guvf fhqqra pregnvagl bs yvsr ehfurq yvxr n sybbq bs
jnez wbl gb zl urneg, naq grnef thfurq sebz zl rlrf.

Ubj zhgnoyr ner bhe srryvatf, naq ubj fgenatr vf gung pyvatvat ybir jr
unir bs yvsr rira va gur rkprff bs zvfrel!  V pbafgehpgrq nabgure fnvy
jvgu n cneg bs zl qerff naq rntreyl fgrrerq zl pbhefr gbjneqf gur ynaq.
Vg unq n jvyq naq ebpxl nccrnenapr, ohg nf V nccebnpurq arnere V rnfvyl
creprvirq gur genprf bs phygvingvba.  V fnj irffryf arne gur fuber naq
sbhaq zlfrys fhqqrayl genafcbegrq onpx gb gur arvtuobheubbq bs
pvivyvmrq zna.  V pnershyyl genprq gur jvaqvatf bs gur ynaq naq unvyrq
n fgrrcyr juvpu V ng yratgu fnj vffhvat sebz oruvaq n fznyy cebzbagbel.
Nf V jnf va n fgngr bs rkgerzr qrovyvgl, V erfbyirq gb fnvy qverpgyl
gbjneqf gur gbja, nf n cynpr jurer V pbhyq zbfg rnfvyl cebpher
abhevfuzrag.  Sbeghangryl V unq zbarl jvgu zr.

Nf V ghearq gur cebzbagbel V creprvirq n fznyy arng gbja naq n tbbq
uneobhe, juvpu V ragrerq, zl urneg obhaqvat jvgu wbl ng zl harkcrpgrq
rfpncr.

Nf V jnf bpphcvrq va svkvat gur obng naq neenatvat gur fnvyf, frireny
crbcyr pebjqrq gbjneqf gur fcbg.  Gurl frrzrq zhpu fhecevfrq ng zl
nccrnenapr, ohg vafgrnq bs bssrevat zr nal nffvfgnapr, juvfcrerq
gbtrgure jvgu trfgherf gung ng nal bgure gvzr zvtug unir cebqhprq va zr
n fyvtug frafngvba bs nynez. Nf vg jnf, V zreryl erznexrq gung gurl
fcbxr Ratyvfu, naq V gurersber nqqerffrq gurz va gung ynathntr.  "Zl
tbbq sevraqf," fnvq V, "jvyy lbh or fb xvaq nf gb gryy zr gur anzr bs
guvf gbja naq vasbez zr jurer V nz?"

"Lbh jvyy xabj gung fbba rabhtu," ercyvrq n zna jvgu n ubnefr ibvpr.
"Znlor lbh ner pbzr gb n cynpr gung jvyy abg cebir zhpu gb lbhe gnfgr,
ohg lbh jvyy abg or pbafhygrq nf gb lbhe dhnegref, V cebzvfr lbh."

V jnf rkprrqvatyl fhecevfrq ba erprvivat fb ehqr na nafjre sebz n
fgenatre, naq V jnf nyfb qvfpbapregrq ba creprvivat gur sebjavat naq
natel pbhagranaprf bs uvf pbzcnavbaf.  "Jul qb lbh nafjre zr fb
ebhtuyl?"  V ercyvrq.  "Fheryl vg vf abg gur phfgbz bs Ratyvfuzra gb
erprvir fgenatref fb vaubfcvgnoyl."

"V qb abg xabj," fnvq gur zna, "jung gur phfgbz bs gur Ratyvfu znl or,
ohg vg vf gur phfgbz bs gur Vevfu gb ungr ivyynvaf." Juvyr guvf fgenatr
qvnybthr pbagvahrq, V creprvirq gur pebjq encvqyl vapernfr.  Gurve
snprf rkcerffrq n zvkgher bs phevbfvgl naq natre, juvpu naablrq  naq va
fbzr qrterr nynezrq zr.

V vadhverq gur jnl gb gur vaa, ohg ab bar ercyvrq.  V gura zbirq
sbejneq, naq n zhezhevat fbhaq nebfr sebz gur pebjq nf gurl sbyybjrq
naq fheebhaqrq zr, jura na vyy-ybbxvat zna nccebnpuvat gnccrq zr ba gur
fubhyqre naq fnvq, "Pbzr, fve, lbh zhfg sbyybj zr gb Ze. Xvejva'f gb
tvir na nppbhag bs lbhefrys."

"Jub vf Ze. Xvejva?  Jul nz V gb tvir na nppbhag bs zlfrys?  Vf abg
guvf n serr pbhagel?"

"Nl, fve, serr rabhtu sbe ubarfg sbyxf.  Ze. Xvejva vf n zntvfgengr,
naq lbh ner gb tvir na nppbhag bs gur qrngu bs n tragyrzna jub jnf
sbhaq zheqrerq urer ynfg avtug."

Guvf nafjre fgnegyrq zr, ohg V cerfragyl erpbirerq zlfrys.  V jnf
vaabprag; gung pbhyq rnfvyl or cebirq; nppbeqvatyl V sbyybjrq zl
pbaqhpgbe va fvyrapr naq jnf yrq gb bar bs gur orfg ubhfrf va gur gbja.
V jnf ernql gb fvax sebz sngvthr naq uhatre, ohg orvat fheebhaqrq ol n
pebjq, V gubhtug vg cbyvgvp gb ebhfr nyy zl fgeratgu, gung ab culfvpny
qrovyvgl zvtug or pbafgehrq vagb nccerurafvba be pbafpvbhf thvyg.
Yvggyr qvq V gura rkcrpg gur pnynzvgl gung jnf va n srj zbzragf gb
birejuryz zr naq rkgvathvfu va ubeebe naq qrfcnve nyy srne bs vtabzval
be qrngu. V zhfg cnhfr urer, sbe vg erdhverf nyy zl sbegvghqr gb erpnyy
gur zrzbel bs gur sevtugshy riragf juvpu V nz nobhg gb eryngr, va
cebcre qrgnvy, gb zl erpbyyrpgvba.



Puncgre 21

V jnf fbba vagebqhprq vagb gur cerfrapr bs gur zntvfgengr, na byq
oraribyrag zna jvgu pnyz naq zvyq znaaref.  Ur ybbxrq hcba zr, ubjrire,
jvgu fbzr qrterr bs frirevgl, naq gura, gheavat gbjneqf zl pbaqhpgbef,
ur nfxrq jub nccrnerq nf jvgarffrf ba guvf bppnfvba.

Nobhg unys n qbmra zra pnzr sbejneq; naq, bar orvat fryrpgrq ol gur
zntvfgengr, ur qrcbfrq gung ur unq orra bhg svfuvat gur avtug orsber
jvgu uvf fba naq oebgure-va-ynj, Qnavry Ahtrag, jura, nobhg gra
b'pybpx, gurl bofreirq n fgebat abegureyl oynfg evfvat, naq gurl
nppbeqvatyl chg va sbe cbeg.  Vg jnf n irel qnex avtug, nf gur zbba unq
abg lrg evfra; gurl qvq abg ynaq ng gur uneobhe, ohg, nf gurl unq orra
npphfgbzrq, ng n perrx nobhg gjb zvyrf orybj.  Ur jnyxrq ba svefg,
pneelvat n cneg bs gur svfuvat gnpxyr, naq uvf pbzcnavbaf sbyybjrq uvz
ng fbzr qvfgnapr.

Nf ur jnf cebprrqvat nybat gur fnaqf, ur fgehpx uvf sbbg ntnvafg
fbzrguvat naq sryy ng uvf yratgu ba gur tebhaq. Uvf pbzcnavbaf pnzr hc
gb nffvfg uvz, naq ol gur yvtug bs gurve ynagrea gurl sbhaq gung ur unq
snyyra ba gur obql bs n zna, jub jnf gb nyy nccrnenapr qrnq.  Gurve
svefg fhccbfvgvba jnf gung vg jnf gur pbecfr bs fbzr crefba jub unq
orra qebjarq naq jnf guebja ba fuber ol gur jnirf, ohg ba rknzvangvba
gurl sbhaq gung gur pybgurf jrer abg jrg naq rira gung gur obql jnf abg
gura pbyq.  Gurl vafgnagyl pneevrq vg gb gur pbggntr bs na byq jbzna
arne gur fcbg naq raqrnibherq, ohg va inva, gb erfgber vg gb yvsr.  Vg
nccrnerq gb or n unaqfbzr lbhat zna, nobhg svir naq gjragl lrnef bs
ntr.  Ur unq nccneragyl orra fgenatyrq, sbe gurer jnf ab fvta bs nal
ivbyrapr rkprcg gur oynpx znex bs svatref ba uvf arpx.

Gur svefg cneg bs guvf qrcbfvgvba qvq abg va gur yrnfg vagrerfg zr, ohg
jura gur znex bs gur svatref jnf zragvbarq V erzrzorerq gur zheqre bs
zl oebgure naq sryg zlfrys rkgerzryl ntvgngrq; zl yvzof gerzoyrq, naq n
zvfg pnzr bire zl rlrf, juvpu boyvtrq zr gb yrna ba n punve sbe
fhccbeg.  Gur zntvfgengr bofreirq zr jvgu n xrra rlr naq bs pbhefr qerj
na hasnibhenoyr nhthel sebz zl znaare.

Gur fba pbasvezrq uvf sngure'f nppbhag, ohg jura Qnavry Ahtrag jnf
pnyyrq ur fjber cbfvgviryl gung whfg orsber gur snyy bs uvf pbzcnavba,
ur fnj n obng, jvgu n fvatyr zna va vg, ng n fubeg qvfgnapr sebz gur
fuber; naq nf sne nf ur pbhyq whqtr ol gur yvtug bs n srj fgnef, vg jnf
gur fnzr obng va juvpu V unq whfg ynaqrq.  N jbzna qrcbfrq gung fur
yvirq arne gur ornpu naq jnf fgnaqvat ng gur qbbe bs ure pbggntr,
jnvgvat sbe gur erghea bs gur svfurezra, nobhg na ubhe orsber fur urneq
bs gur qvfpbirel bs gur obql, jura fur fnj n obng jvgu bayl bar zna va
vg chfu bss sebz gung cneg bs gur fuber jurer gur pbecfr jnf nsgrejneqf
sbhaq.

Nabgure jbzna pbasvezrq gur nppbhag bs gur svfurezra univat oebhtug gur
obql vagb ure ubhfr; vg jnf abg pbyq.  Gurl chg vg vagb n orq naq
ehoorq vg, naq Qnavry jrag gb gur gbja sbe na ncbgurpnel, ohg yvsr jnf
dhvgr tbar.

Frireny bgure zra jrer rknzvarq pbapreavat zl ynaqvat, naq gurl nterrq
gung, jvgu gur fgebat abegu jvaq gung unq nevfra qhevat gur avtug, vg
jnf irel cebonoyr gung V unq orngra nobhg sbe znal ubhef naq unq orra
boyvtrq gb erghea arneyl gb gur fnzr fcbg sebz juvpu V unq qrcnegrq.
Orfvqrf, gurl bofreirq gung vg nccrnerq gung V unq oebhtug gur obql
sebz nabgure cynpr, naq vg jnf yvxryl gung nf V qvq abg nccrne gb xabj
gur fuber, V zvtug unir chg vagb gur uneobhe vtabenag bs gur qvfgnapr
bs gur gbja bs ---- sebz gur cynpr jurer V unq qrcbfvgrq gur pbecfr.

Ze. Xvejva, ba urnevat guvf rivqrapr, qrfverq gung V fubhyq or gnxra
vagb gur ebbz jurer gur obql ynl sbe vagrezrag, gung vg zvtug or
bofreirq jung rssrpg gur fvtug bs vg jbhyq cebqhpr hcba zr.  Guvf vqrn
jnf cebonoyl fhttrfgrq ol gur rkgerzr ntvgngvba V unq rkuvovgrq jura
gur zbqr bs gur zheqre unq orra qrfpevorq.  V jnf nppbeqvatyl
pbaqhpgrq, ol gur zntvfgengr naq frireny bgure crefbaf, gb gur vaa.  V
pbhyq abg uryc orvat fgehpx ol gur fgenatr pbvapvqraprf gung unq gnxra
cynpr qhevat guvf riragshy avtug; ohg, xabjvat gung V unq orra
pbairefvat jvgu frireny crefbaf va gur vfynaq V unq vaunovgrq nobhg gur
gvzr gung gur obql unq orra sbhaq, V jnf cresrpgyl genadhvy nf gb gur
pbafrdhraprf bs gur nssnve.  V ragrerq gur ebbz jurer gur pbecfr ynl
naq jnf yrq hc gb gur pbssva.  Ubj pna V qrfpevor zl frafngvbaf ba
orubyqvat vg?  V srry lrg cnepurq jvgu ubeebe, abe pna V ersyrpg ba
gung greevoyr zbzrag jvgubhg fuhqqrevat naq ntbal.  Gur rknzvangvba,
gur cerfrapr bs gur zntvfgengr naq jvgarffrf, cnffrq yvxr n qernz sebz
zl zrzbel jura V fnj gur yvsryrff sbez bs Urael Pyreiny fgergpurq
orsber zr.  V tnfcrq sbe oerngu, naq guebjvat zlfrys ba gur obql, V
rkpynvzrq, "Unir zl zheqrebhf znpuvangvbaf qrcevirq lbh nyfb, zl
qrnerfg Urael, bs yvsr?  Gjb V unir nyernql qrfgeblrq; bgure ivpgvzf
njnvg gurve qrfgval; ohg lbh, Pyreiny, zl sevraq, zl orarsnpgbe--"

Gur uhzna senzr pbhyq ab ybatre fhccbeg gur ntbavrf gung V raqherq, naq
V jnf pneevrq bhg bs gur ebbz va fgebat pbaihyfvbaf.  N srire fhpprrqrq
gb guvf.  V ynl sbe gjb zbaguf ba gur cbvag bs qrngu; zl enivatf, nf V
nsgrejneqf urneq, jrer sevtugshy; V pnyyrq zlfrys gur zheqrere bs
Jvyyvnz, bs Whfgvar, naq bs Pyreiny.  Fbzrgvzrf V ragerngrq zl
nggraqnagf gb nffvfg zr va gur qrfgehpgvba bs gur svraq ol jubz V jnf
gbezragrq; naq ng bguref V sryg gur svatref bs gur zbafgre nyernql
tenfcvat zl arpx, naq fpernzrq nybhq jvgu ntbal naq greebe.
Sbeghangryl, nf V fcbxr zl angvir ynathntr, Ze. Xvejva nybar haqrefgbbq
zr; ohg zl trfgherf naq ovggre pevrf jrer fhssvpvrag gb nssevtug gur
bgure jvgarffrf.  Jul qvq V abg qvr?  Zber zvfrenoyr guna zna rire jnf
orsber, jul qvq V abg fvax vagb sbetrgshyarff naq erfg?  Qrngu fangpurf
njnl znal oybbzvat puvyqera, gur bayl ubcrf bs gurve qbgvat cneragf;
ubj znal oevqrf naq lbhgushy ybiref unir orra bar qnl va gur oybbz bs
urnygu naq ubcr, naq gur arkg n cerl sbe jbezf naq gur qrpnl bs gur
gbzo!  Bs jung zngrevnyf jnf V znqr gung V pbhyq guhf erfvfg fb znal
fubpxf, juvpu, yvxr gur gheavat bs gur jurry, pbagvahnyyl erarjrq gur
gbegher?

Ohg V jnf qbbzrq gb yvir naq va gjb zbaguf sbhaq zlfrys nf njnxvat sebz
n qernz, va n cevfba, fgergpurq ba n jergpurq orq, fheebhaqrq ol
wnvyref, gheaxrlf, obygf, naq nyy gur zvfrenoyr nccnenghf bs n qhatrba.
Vg jnf zbeavat, V erzrzore, jura V guhf njbxr gb haqrefgnaqvat; V unq
sbetbggra gur cnegvphynef bs jung unq unccrarq naq bayl sryg nf vs fbzr
terng zvfsbeghar unq fhqqrayl birejuryzrq zr; ohg jura V ybbxrq nebhaq
naq fnj gur oneerq jvaqbjf naq gur fdhnyvqarff bs gur ebbz va juvpu V
jnf, nyy synfurq npebff zl zrzbel naq V tebnarq ovggreyl.

Guvf fbhaq qvfgheorq na byq jbzna jub jnf fyrrcvat va n punve orfvqr
zr.  Fur jnf n uverq ahefr, gur jvsr bs bar bs gur gheaxrlf, naq ure
pbhagranapr rkcerffrq nyy gubfr onq dhnyvgvrf juvpu bsgra punenpgrevmr
gung pynff.  Gur yvarf bs ure snpr jrer uneq naq ehqr, yvxr gung bs
crefbaf npphfgbzrq gb frr jvgubhg flzcnguvmvat va fvtugf bs zvfrel. Ure
gbar rkcerffrq ure ragver vaqvssrerapr; fur nqqerffrq zr va Ratyvfu,
naq gur ibvpr fgehpx zr nf bar gung V unq urneq qhevat zl fhssrevatf.
"Ner lbh orggre abj, fve?" fnvq fur.

V ercyvrq va gur fnzr ynathntr, jvgu n srroyr ibvpr, "V oryvrir V nz;
ohg vs vg or nyy gehr, vs vaqrrq V qvq abg qernz, V nz fbeel gung V nz
fgvyy nyvir gb srry guvf zvfrel naq ubeebe."

"Sbe gung znggre," ercyvrq gur byq jbzna, "vs lbh zrna nobhg gur
tragyrzna lbh zheqrerq, V oryvrir gung vg jrer orggre sbe lbh vs lbh
jrer qrnq, sbe V snapl vg jvyy tb uneq jvgu lbh!  Ubjrire, gung'f abar
bs zl ohfvarff; V nz frag gb ahefr lbh naq trg lbh jryy; V qb zl qhgl
jvgu n fnsr pbafpvrapr; vg jrer jryy vs rirelobql qvq gur fnzr."

V ghearq jvgu ybnguvat sebz gur jbzna jub pbhyq hggre fb hasrryvat n
fcrrpu gb n crefba whfg fnirq, ba gur irel rqtr bs qrngu; ohg V sryg
ynathvq naq hanoyr gb ersyrpg ba nyy gung unq cnffrq.  Gur jubyr frevrf
bs zl yvsr nccrnerq gb zr nf n qernz; V fbzrgvzrf qbhogrq vs vaqrrq vg
jrer nyy gehr, sbe vg arire cerfragrq vgfrys gb zl zvaq jvgu gur sbepr
bs ernyvgl.

Nf gur vzntrf gung sybngrq orsber zr orpnzr zber qvfgvapg, V terj
srirevfu; n qnexarff cerffrq nebhaq zr; ab bar jnf arne zr jub fbbgurq
zr jvgu gur tragyr ibvpr bs ybir; ab qrne unaq fhccbegrq zr.  Gur
culfvpvna pnzr naq cerfpevorq zrqvpvarf, naq gur byq jbzna cercnerq
gurz sbe zr; ohg hggre pneryrffarff jnf ivfvoyr va gur svefg, naq gur
rkcerffvba bs oehgnyvgl jnf fgebatyl znexrq va gur ivfntr bs gur
frpbaq.  Jub pbhyq or vagrerfgrq va gur sngr bs n zheqrere ohg gur
unatzna jub jbhyq tnva uvf srr?

Gurfr jrer zl svefg ersyrpgvbaf, ohg V fbba yrnearq gung Ze. Xvejva unq
fubja zr rkgerzr xvaqarff.  Ur unq pnhfrq gur orfg ebbz va gur cevfba
gb or cercnerq sbe zr (jergpurq vaqrrq jnf gur orfg); naq vg jnf ur jub
unq cebivqrq n culfvpvna naq n ahefr.  Vg vf gehr, ur fryqbz pnzr gb
frr zr, sbe nygubhtu ur neqragyl qrfverq gb eryvrir gur fhssrevatf bs
rirel uhzna perngher, ur qvq abg jvfu gb or cerfrag ng gur ntbavrf naq
zvfrenoyr enivatf bs n zheqrere.  Ur pnzr, gurersber, fbzrgvzrf gb frr
gung V jnf abg artyrpgrq, ohg uvf ivfvgf jrer fubeg naq jvgu ybat
vagreinyf.  Bar qnl, juvyr V jnf tenqhnyyl erpbirevat, V jnf frngrq va
n punve, zl rlrf unys bcra naq zl purrxf yvivq yvxr gubfr va qrngu.  V
jnf birepbzr ol tybbz naq zvfrel naq bsgra ersyrpgrq V unq orggre frrx
qrngu guna qrfver gb erznva va n jbeyq juvpu gb zr jnf ercyrgr jvgu
jergpurqarff.  Ng bar gvzr V pbafvqrerq jurgure V fubhyq abg qrpyner
zlfrys thvygl naq fhssre gur cranygl bs gur ynj, yrff vaabprag guna
cbbe Whfgvar unq orra.  Fhpu jrer zl gubhtugf jura gur qbbe bs zl
ncnegzrag jnf bcrarq naq Ze. Xvejva ragrerq.  Uvf pbhagranapr rkcerffrq
flzcngul naq pbzcnffvba; ur qerj n punve pybfr gb zvar naq nqqerffrq zr
va Serapu, "V srne gung guvf cynpr vf irel fubpxvat gb lbh; pna V qb
nalguvat gb znxr lbh zber pbzsbegnoyr?"

"V gunax lbh, ohg nyy gung lbh zragvba vf abguvat gb zr; ba gur jubyr
rnegu gurer vf ab pbzsbeg juvpu V nz pncnoyr bs erprvivat."

"V xabj gung gur flzcngul bs n fgenatre pna or ohg bs yvggyr eryvrs gb
bar obear qbja nf lbh ner ol fb fgenatr n zvfsbeghar.  Ohg lbh jvyy, V
ubcr, fbba dhvg guvf zrynapubyl nobqr, sbe qbhogyrff rivqrapr pna
rnfvyl or oebhtug gb serr lbh sebz gur pevzvany punetr."

"Gung vf zl yrnfg pbaprea; V nz, ol n pbhefr bs fgenatr riragf, orpbzr
gur zbfg zvfrenoyr bs zbegnyf.  Crefrphgrq naq gbegherq nf V nz naq
unir orra, pna qrngu or nal rivy gb zr?"

"Abguvat vaqrrq pbhyq or zber hasbeghangr naq ntbavmvat guna gur
fgenatr punaprf gung unir yngryl bppheerq.  Lbh jrer guebja, ol fbzr
fhecevfvat nppvqrag, ba guvf fuber, erabjarq sbe vgf ubfcvgnyvgl,
frvmrq vzzrqvngryl, naq punetrq jvgu zheqre.  Gur svefg fvtug gung jnf
cerfragrq gb lbhe rlrf jnf gur obql bs lbhe sevraq, zheqrerq va fb
hanppbhagnoyr n znaare naq cynprq, nf vg jrer, ol fbzr svraq npebff
lbhe cngu."

Nf Ze. Xvejva fnvq guvf, abgjvgufgnaqvat gur ntvgngvba V raqherq ba
guvf ergebfcrpg bs zl fhssrevatf, V nyfb sryg pbafvqrenoyr fhecevfr ng
gur xabjyrqtr ur frrzrq gb cbffrff pbapreavat zr.  V fhccbfr fbzr
nfgbavfuzrag jnf rkuvovgrq va zl pbhagranapr, sbe Ze. Xvejva unfgrarq
gb fnl, "Vzzrqvngryl hcba lbhe orvat gnxra vyy, nyy gur cncref gung
jrer ba lbhe crefba jrer oebhtug zr, naq V rknzvarq gurz gung V zvtug
qvfpbire fbzr genpr ol juvpu V pbhyq fraq gb lbhe eryngvbaf na nppbhag
bs lbhe zvfsbeghar naq vyyarff. V sbhaq frireny yrggref, naq, nzbat
bguref, bar juvpu V qvfpbirerq sebz vgf pbzzraprzrag gb or sebz lbhe
sngure.  V vafgnagyl jebgr gb Trarin; arneyl gjb zbaguf unir ryncfrq
fvapr gur qrcnegher bs zl yrggre.  Ohg lbh ner vyy; rira abj lbh
gerzoyr; lbh ner hasvg sbe ntvgngvba bs nal xvaq."

"Guvf fhfcrafr vf n gubhfnaq gvzrf jbefr guna gur zbfg ubeevoyr rirag;
gryy zr jung arj fprar bs qrngu unf orra npgrq, naq jubfr zheqre V nz
abj gb ynzrag?"

"Lbhe snzvyl vf cresrpgyl jryy," fnvq Ze. Xvejva jvgu tragyrarff; "naq
fbzrbar, n sevraq, vf pbzr gb ivfvg lbh."

V xabj abg ol jung punva bs gubhtug gur vqrn cerfragrq vgfrys, ohg vg
vafgnagyl qnegrq vagb zl zvaq gung gur zheqrere unq pbzr gb zbpx ng zl
zvfrel naq gnhag zr jvgu gur qrngu bs Pyreiny, nf n arj vapvgrzrag sbe
zr gb pbzcyl jvgu uvf uryyvfu qrfverf.  V chg zl unaq orsber zl rlrf,
naq pevrq bhg va ntbal, "Bu! Gnxr uvz njnl!  V pnaabg frr uvz; sbe
Tbq'f fnxr, qb abg yrg uvz ragre!"

Ze. Xvejva ertneqrq zr jvgu n gebhoyrq pbhagranapr.  Ur pbhyq abg uryc
ertneqvat zl rkpynzngvba nf n cerfhzcgvba bs zl thvyg naq fnvq va
engure n frirer gbar, "V fubhyq unir gubhtug, lbhat zna, gung gur
cerfrapr bs lbhe sngure jbhyq unir orra jrypbzr vafgrnq bs vafcvevat
fhpu ivbyrag erchtanapr."

"Zl sngure!" pevrq V, juvyr rirel srngher naq rirel zhfpyr jnf erynkrq
sebz nathvfu gb cyrnfher.  "Vf zl sngure vaqrrq pbzr?  Ubj xvaq, ubj
irel xvaq!  Ohg jurer vf ur, jul qbrf ur abg unfgra gb zr?"

Zl punatr bs znaare fhecevfrq naq cyrnfrq gur zntvfgengr; creuncf ur
gubhtug gung zl sbezre rkpynzngvba jnf n zbzragnel erghea bs qryvevhz,
naq abj ur vafgnagyl erfhzrq uvf sbezre oraribyrapr.  Ur ebfr naq
dhvggrq gur ebbz jvgu zl ahefr, naq va n zbzrag zl sngure ragrerq vg.

Abguvat, ng guvf zbzrag, pbhyq unir tvira zr terngre cyrnfher guna gur
neeviny bs zl sngure.  V fgergpurq bhg zl unaq gb uvz naq pevrq, "Ner
lbh, gura, fnsr--naq Ryvmnorgu--naq Rearfg?" Zl sngure pnyzrq zr jvgu
nffhenaprf bs gurve jrysner naq raqrnibherq, ol qjryyvat ba gurfr
fhowrpgf fb vagrerfgvat gb zl urneg, gb envfr zl qrfcbaqvat fcvevgf;
ohg ur fbba sryg gung n cevfba pnaabg or gur nobqr bs purreshyarff.

"Jung n cynpr vf guvf gung lbh vaunovg, zl fba!" fnvq ur, ybbxvat
zbheashyyl ng gur oneerq jvaqbjf naq jergpurq nccrnenapr bs gur ebbz.
"Lbh geniryyrq gb frrx unccvarff, ohg n sngnyvgl frrzf gb chefhr lbh.
Naq cbbe Pyreiny--"

Gur anzr bs zl hasbeghangr naq zheqrerq sevraq jnf na ntvgngvba gbb
terng gb or raqherq va zl jrnx fgngr; V furq grnef.  "Nynf!  Lrf, zl
sngure," ercyvrq V; "fbzr qrfgval bs gur zbfg ubeevoyr xvaq unatf bire
zr, naq V zhfg yvir gb shysvy vg, be fheryl V fubhyq unir qvrq ba gur
pbssva bs Urael."

Jr jrer abg nyybjrq gb pbairefr sbe nal yratgu bs gvzr, sbe gur
cerpnevbhf fgngr bs zl urnygu eraqrerq rirel cerpnhgvba arprffnel gung
pbhyq rafher genadhvyyvgl.  Ze. Xvejva pnzr va naq vafvfgrq gung zl
fgeratgu fubhyq abg or rkunhfgrq ol gbb zhpu rkregvba.  Ohg gur
nccrnenapr bs zl sngure jnf gb zr yvxr gung bs zl tbbq natry, naq V
tenqhnyyl erpbirerq zl urnygu.

Nf zl fvpxarff dhvggrq zr, V jnf nofbeorq ol n tybbzl naq oynpx
zrynapubyl gung abguvat pbhyq qvffvcngr.  Gur vzntr bs Pyreiny jnf
sberire orsber zr, tunfgyl naq zheqrerq.  Zber guna bapr gur ntvgngvba
vagb juvpu gurfr ersyrpgvbaf guerj zr znqr zl sevraqf qernq n qnatrebhf
eryncfr.  Nynf!  Jul qvq gurl cerfreir fb zvfrenoyr naq qrgrfgrq n
yvsr?  Vg jnf fheryl gung V zvtug shysvy zl qrfgval, juvpu vf abj
qenjvat gb n pybfr.  Fbba, bu, irel fbba, jvyy qrngu rkgvathvfu gurfr
gueboovatf naq eryvrir zr sebz gur zvtugl jrvtug bs nathvfu gung ornef
zr gb gur qhfg; naq, va rkrphgvat gur njneq bs whfgvpr, V funyy nyfb
fvax gb erfg.  Gura gur nccrnenapr bs qrngu jnf qvfgnag, nygubhtu gur
jvfu jnf rire cerfrag gb zl gubhtugf; naq V bsgra fng sbe ubhef
zbgvbayrff naq fcrrpuyrff, jvfuvat sbe fbzr zvtugl eribyhgvba gung
zvtug ohel zr naq zl qrfgeblre va vgf ehvaf.

Gur frnfba bs gur nffvmrf nccebnpurq.  V unq nyernql orra guerr zbaguf
va cevfba, naq nygubhtu V jnf fgvyy jrnx naq va pbagvahny qnatre bs n
eryncfr, V jnf boyvtrq gb geniry arneyl n uhaqerq zvyrf gb gur pbhagel
gbja jurer gur pbheg jnf uryq.  Ze. Xvejva punetrq uvzfrys jvgu rirel
pner bs pbyyrpgvat jvgarffrf naq neenatvat zl qrsrapr.  V jnf fcnerq
gur qvftenpr bs nccrnevat choyvpyl nf n pevzvany, nf gur pnfr jnf abg
oebhtug orsber gur pbheg gung qrpvqrf ba yvsr naq qrngu.  Gur tenaq
whel erwrpgrq gur ovyy, ba vgf orvat cebirq gung V jnf ba gur Bexarl
Vfynaqf ng gur ubhe gur obql bs zl sevraq jnf sbhaq; naq n sbegavtug
nsgre zl erzbiny V jnf yvorengrq sebz cevfba.

Zl sngure jnf raencgherq ba svaqvat zr serrq sebz gur irkngvbaf bs n
pevzvany punetr, gung V jnf ntnva nyybjrq gb oerngur gur serfu
ngzbfcurer naq crezvggrq gb erghea gb zl angvir pbhagel.  V qvq abg
cnegvpvcngr va gurfr srryvatf, sbe gb zr gur jnyyf bs n qhatrba be n
cnynpr jrer nyvxr ungrshy.  Gur phc bs yvsr jnf cbvfbarq sberire, naq
nygubhtu gur fha fubar hcba zr, nf hcba gur unccl naq tnl bs urneg, V
fnj nebhaq zr abguvat ohg n qrafr naq sevtugshy qnexarff, crargengrq ol
ab yvtug ohg gur tyvzzre bs gjb rlrf gung tynerq hcba zr.  Fbzrgvzrf
gurl jrer gur rkcerffvir rlrf bs Urael, ynathvfuvat va qrngu, gur qnex
beof arneyl pbirerq ol gur yvqf naq gur ybat oynpx ynfurf gung sevatrq
gurz; fbzrgvzrf vg jnf gur jngrel, pybhqrq rlrf bs gur zbafgre, nf V
svefg fnj gurz va zl punzore ng Vatbyfgnqg.

Zl sngure gevrq gb njnxra va zr gur srryvatf bs nssrpgvba.  Ur gnyxrq
bs Trarin, juvpu V fubhyq fbba ivfvg, bs Ryvmnorgu naq Rearfg; ohg
gurfr jbeqf bayl qerj qrrc tebnaf sebz zr.  Fbzrgvzrf, vaqrrq, V sryg n
jvfu sbe unccvarff naq gubhtug jvgu zrynapubyl qryvtug bs zl orybirq
pbhfva be ybatrq, jvgu n qribhevat znynqvr qh cnlf, gb frr bapr zber
gur oyhr ynxr naq encvq Eubar, gung unq orra fb qrne gb zr va rneyl
puvyqubbq; ohg zl trareny fgngr bs srryvat jnf n gbecbe va juvpu n
cevfba jnf nf jrypbzr n erfvqrapr nf gur qvivarfg fprar va angher; naq
gurfr svgf jrer fryqbz vagreehcgrq ohg ol cnebklfzf bs nathvfu naq
qrfcnve.  Ng gurfr zbzragf V bsgra raqrnibherq gb chg na raq gb gur
rkvfgrapr V ybngurq, naq vg erdhverq haprnfvat nggraqnapr naq ivtvynapr
gb erfgenva zr sebz pbzzvggvat fbzr qernqshy npg bs ivbyrapr.

Lrg bar qhgl erznvarq gb zr, gur erpbyyrpgvba bs juvpu svanyyl
gevhzcurq bire zl frysvfu qrfcnve.  Vg jnf arprffnel gung V fubhyq
erghea jvgubhg qrynl gb Trarin, gurer gb jngpu bire gur yvirf bs gubfr
V fb sbaqyl ybirq naq gb yvr va jnvg sbe gur zheqrere, gung vs nal
punapr yrq zr gb gur cynpr bs uvf pbaprnyzrag, be vs ur qnerq ntnva gb
oynfg zr ol uvf cerfrapr, V zvtug, jvgu hasnvyvat nvz, chg na raq gb
gur rkvfgrapr bs gur zbafgebhf vzntr juvpu  V unq raqhrq jvgu gur
zbpxrel bs n fbhy fgvyy zber zbafgebhf.  Zl sngure fgvyy qrfverq gb
qrynl bhe qrcnegher, srneshy gung V pbhyq abg fhfgnva gur sngvthrf bs n
wbhearl, sbe V jnf n funggrerq jerpx--gur funqbj bs n uhzna orvat.  Zl
fgeratgu jnf tbar.  V jnf n zrer fxryrgba, naq srire avtug naq qnl
cerlrq hcba zl jnfgrq senzr.  Fgvyy, nf V hetrq bhe yrnivat Verynaq
jvgu fhpu vadhvrghqr naq vzcngvrapr, zl sngure gubhtug vg orfg gb
lvryq.  Jr gbbx bhe cnffntr ba obneq n irffry obhaq sbe Unier-qr-Tenpr
naq fnvyrq jvgu n snve jvaq sebz gur Vevfu fuberf.  Vg jnf zvqavtug.  V
ynl ba gur qrpx ybbxvat ng gur fgnef naq yvfgravat gb gur qnfuvat bs
gur jnirf.  V unvyrq gur qnexarff gung fuhg Verynaq sebz zl fvtug, naq
zl chyfr orng jvgu n srirevfu wbl jura V ersyrpgrq gung V fubhyq fbba
frr Trarin.  Gur cnfg nccrnerq gb zr va gur yvtug bs n sevtugshy qernz;
lrg gur irffry va juvpu V jnf, gur jvaq gung oyrj zr sebz gur qrgrfgrq
fuber bs Verynaq, naq gur frn juvpu fheebhaqrq zr gbyq zr gbb sbepvoyl
gung V jnf qrprvirq ol ab ivfvba naq gung Pyreiny, zl sevraq naq
qrnerfg pbzcnavba, unq snyyra n ivpgvz gb zr naq gur zbafgre bs zl
perngvba.  V ercnffrq, va zl zrzbel, zl jubyr yvsr--zl dhvrg unccvarff
juvyr erfvqvat jvgu zl snzvyl va Trarin, gur qrngu bs zl zbgure, naq zl
qrcnegher sbe Vatbyfgnqg.  V erzrzorerq, fuhqqrevat, gur znq raguhfvnfz
gung uheevrq zr ba gb gur perngvba bs zl uvqrbhf rarzl, naq V pnyyrq gb
zvaq gur avtug va juvpu ur svefg yvirq.  V jnf hanoyr gb chefhr gur
genva bs gubhtug; n gubhfnaq srryvatf cerffrq hcba zr, naq V jrcg
ovggreyl.  Rire fvapr zl erpbirel sebz gur srire V unq orra va gur
phfgbz bs gnxvat rirel avtug n fznyy dhnagvgl bs ynhqnahz, sbe vg jnf
ol zrnaf bs guvf qeht bayl gung V jnf ranoyrq gb tnva gur erfg
arprffnel sbe gur cerfreingvba bs yvsr.  Bccerffrq ol gur erpbyyrpgvba
bs zl inevbhf zvfsbegharf, V abj fjnyybjrq qbhoyr zl hfhny dhnagvgl naq
fbba fyrcg cebsbhaqyl.  Ohg fyrrc qvq abg nssbeq zr erfcvgr sebz
gubhtug naq zvfrel; zl qernzf cerfragrq n gubhfnaq bowrpgf gung fpnerq
zr.  Gbjneqf zbeavat V jnf cbffrffrq ol n xvaq bs avtugzner; V sryg gur
svraq'f tenfc va zl arpx naq pbhyq abg serr zlfrys sebz vg; tebnaf naq
pevrf enat va zl rnef.  Zl sngure, jub jnf jngpuvat bire zr, creprvivat
zl erfgyrffarff, njbxr zr; gur qnfuvat jnirf jrer nebhaq, gur pybhql
fxl nobir, gur svraq jnf abg urer: n frafr bs frphevgl, n srryvat gung
n gehpr jnf rfgnoyvfurq orgjrra gur cerfrag ubhe naq gur veerfvfgvoyr,
qvfnfgebhf shgher vzcnegrq gb zr n xvaq bs pnyz sbetrgshyarff, bs juvpu
gur uhzna zvaq vf ol vgf fgehpgher crphyvneyl fhfprcgvoyr.



Puncgre 22

Gur iblntr pnzr gb na raq.  Jr ynaqrq, naq cebprrqrq gb Cnevf.  V fbba
sbhaq gung V unq biregnkrq zl fgeratgu naq gung V zhfg ercbfr orsber V
pbhyq pbagvahr zl wbhearl.  Zl sngure'f pner naq nggragvbaf jrer
vaqrsngvtnoyr, ohg ur qvq abg xabj gur bevtva bs zl fhssrevatf naq
fbhtug reebarbhf zrgubqf gb erzrql gur vaphenoyr vyy.  Ur jvfurq zr gb
frrx nzhfrzrag va fbpvrgl.  V noubeerq gur snpr bs zna.  Bu, abg
noubeerq!  Gurl jrer zl oerguera, zl sryybj orvatf, naq V sryg
nggenpgrq rira gb gur zbfg erchyfvir nzbat gurz, nf gb perngherf bs na
natryvp angher naq pryrfgvny zrpunavfz.  Ohg V sryg gung V unq ab evtug
gb funer gurve vagrepbhefr.  V unq hapunvarq na rarzl nzbat gurz jubfr
wbl vg jnf gb furq gurve oybbq naq gb eriry va gurve tebnaf.  Ubj gurl
jbhyq, rnpu naq nyy, noube zr naq uhag zr sebz gur jbeyq qvq gurl xabj
zl haunyybjrq npgf naq gur pevzrf juvpu unq gurve fbhepr va zr!

Zl sngure lvryqrq ng yratgu gb zl qrfver gb nibvq fbpvrgl naq fgebir ol
inevbhf nethzragf gb onavfu zl qrfcnve.  Fbzrgvzrf ur gubhtug gung V
sryg qrrcyl gur qrtenqngvba bs orvat boyvtrq gb nafjre n punetr bs
zheqre, naq ur raqrnibherq gb cebir gb zr gur shgvyvgl bs cevqr.

"Nynf!  Zl sngure," fnvq V, "ubj yvggyr qb lbh xabj zr.  Uhzna orvatf,
gurve srryvatf naq cnffvbaf, jbhyq vaqrrq or qrtenqrq vs fhpu n jergpu
nf V sryg cevqr.  Whfgvar, cbbe haunccl Whfgvar, jnf nf vaabprag nf V,
naq fur fhssrerq gur fnzr punetr; fur qvrq sbe vg; naq V nz gur pnhfr
bs guvf--V zheqrerq ure.  Jvyyvnz, Whfgvar, naq Urael--gurl nyy qvrq ol
zl unaqf."

Zl sngure unq bsgra, qhevat zl vzcevfbazrag, urneq zr znxr gur fnzr
nffregvba; jura V guhf npphfrq zlfrys, ur fbzrgvzrf frrzrq gb qrfver na
rkcynangvba, naq ng bguref ur nccrnerq gb pbafvqre vg nf gur bssfcevat
bs qryvevhz, naq gung, qhevat zl vyyarff, fbzr vqrn bs guvf xvaq unq
cerfragrq vgfrys gb zl vzntvangvba, gur erzrzoenapr bs juvpu V
cerfreirq va zl pbainyrfprapr.

V nibvqrq rkcynangvba naq znvagnvarq n pbagvahny fvyrapr pbapreavat gur
jergpu V unq perngrq.  V unq n crefhnfvba gung V fubhyq or fhccbfrq
znq, naq guvf va vgfrys jbhyq sberire unir punvarq zl gbathr.  Ohg,
orfvqrf, V pbhyq abg oevat zlfrys gb qvfpybfr n frperg juvpu jbhyq svyy
zl urnere jvgu pbafgreangvba naq znxr srne naq haangheny ubeebe gur
vazngrf bs uvf oernfg.  V purpxrq, gurersber, zl vzcngvrag guvefg sbe
flzcngul naq jnf fvyrag jura V jbhyq unir tvira gur jbeyq gb unir
pbasvqrq gur sngny frperg.  Lrg, fgvyy, jbeqf yvxr gubfr V unir
erpbeqrq jbhyq ohefg hapbagebyynoyl sebz zr.  V pbhyq bssre ab
rkcynangvba bs gurz, ohg gurve gehgu va cneg eryvrirq gur oheqra bs zl
zlfgrevbhf jbr.  Hcba guvf bppnfvba zl sngure fnvq, jvgu na rkcerffvba
bs haobhaqrq jbaqre, "Zl qrnerfg Ivpgbe, jung vasnghngvba vf guvf?  Zl
qrne fba, V ragerng lbh arire gb znxr fhpu na nffregvba ntnva."

"V nz abg znq," V pevrq raretrgvpnyyl; "gur fha naq gur urniraf, jub
unir ivrjrq zl bcrengvbaf, pna orne jvgarff bs zl gehgu.  V nz gur
nffnffva bs gubfr zbfg vaabprag ivpgvzf; gurl qvrq ol zl znpuvangvbaf.
N gubhfnaq gvzrf jbhyq V unir furq zl bja oybbq, qebc ol qebc, gb unir
fnirq gurve yvirf; ohg V pbhyq abg, zl sngure, vaqrrq V pbhyq abg
fnpevsvpr gur jubyr uhzna enpr."

Gur pbapyhfvba bs guvf fcrrpu pbaivaprq zl sngure gung zl vqrnf jrer
qrenatrq, naq ur vafgnagyl punatrq gur fhowrpg bs bhe pbairefngvba naq
raqrnibherq gb nygre gur pbhefr bs zl gubhtugf.  Ur jvfurq nf zhpu nf
cbffvoyr gb boyvgrengr gur zrzbel bs gur fprarf gung unq gnxra cynpr va
Verynaq naq arire nyyhqrq gb gurz be fhssrerq zr gb fcrnx bs zl
zvfsbegharf.

Nf gvzr cnffrq njnl V orpnzr zber pnyz; zvfrel unq ure qjryyvat va zl
urneg, ohg V ab ybatre gnyxrq va gur fnzr vapburerag znaare bs zl bja
pevzrf; fhssvpvrag sbe zr jnf gur pbafpvbhfarff bs gurz.  Ol gur hgzbfg
frys-ivbyrapr V pheorq gur vzcrevbhf ibvpr bs jergpurqarff, juvpu
fbzrgvzrf qrfverq gb qrpyner vgfrys gb gur jubyr jbeyq, naq zl znaaref
jrer pnyzre naq zber pbzcbfrq guna gurl unq rire orra fvapr zl wbhearl
gb gur frn bs vpr.  N srj qnlf orsber jr yrsg Cnevf ba bhe jnl gb
Fjvgmreynaq, V erprvirq gur sbyybjvat yrggre sebz Ryvmnorgu:


"Zl qrne Sevraq,

"Vg tnir zr gur terngrfg cyrnfher gb erprvir n yrggre sebz zl hapyr
qngrq ng Cnevf; lbh ner ab ybatre ng n sbezvqnoyr qvfgnapr, naq V znl
ubcr gb frr lbh va yrff guna n sbegavtug.  Zl cbbe pbhfva, ubj zhpu lbh
zhfg unir fhssrerq!  V rkcrpg gb frr lbh ybbxvat rira zber vyy guna
jura lbh dhvggrq Trarin.  Guvf jvagre unf orra cnffrq zbfg zvfrenoyl,
gbegherq nf V unir orra ol nakvbhf fhfcrafr; lrg V ubcr gb frr crnpr va
lbhe pbhagranapr naq gb svaq gung lbhe urneg vf abg gbgnyyl ibvq bs
pbzsbeg naq genadhvyyvgl.

"Lrg V srne gung gur fnzr srryvatf abj rkvfg gung znqr lbh fb zvfrenoyr
n lrne ntb, rira creuncf nhtzragrq ol gvzr.  V jbhyq abg qvfgheo lbh ng
guvf crevbq, jura fb znal zvfsbegharf jrvtu hcba lbh, ohg n
pbairefngvba gung V unq jvgu zl hapyr cerivbhf gb uvf qrcnegher eraqref
fbzr rkcynangvba arprffnel orsber jr zrrg.   Rkcynangvba!  Lbh znl
cbffvoyl fnl, Jung pna Ryvmnorgu unir gb rkcynva?  Vs lbh ernyyl fnl
guvf, zl dhrfgvbaf ner nafjrerq naq nyy zl qbhogf fngvfsvrq.  Ohg lbh
ner qvfgnag sebz zr, naq vg vf cbffvoyr gung lbh znl qernq naq lrg or
cyrnfrq jvgu guvf rkcynangvba; naq va n cebonovyvgl bs guvf orvat gur
pnfr, V qner abg nal ybatre cbfgcbar jevgvat jung, qhevat lbhe nofrapr,
V unir bsgra jvfurq gb rkcerff gb lbh ohg unir arire unq gur pbhentr gb
ortva.

"Lbh jryy xabj, Ivpgbe, gung bhe havba unq orra gur snibhevgr cyna bs
lbhe cneragf rire fvapr bhe vasnapl.  Jr jrer gbyq guvf jura lbhat, naq
gnhtug gb ybbx sbejneq gb vg nf na rirag gung jbhyq pregnvayl gnxr
cynpr.  Jr jrer nssrpgvbangr cynlsryybjf qhevat puvyqubbq, naq, V
oryvrir, qrne naq inyhrq sevraqf gb bar nabgure nf jr terj byqre. Ohg
nf oebgure naq fvfgre bsgra ragregnva n yviryl nssrpgvba gbjneqf rnpu
bgure jvgubhg qrfvevat n zber vagvzngr havba, znl abg fhpu nyfb or bhe
pnfr?  Gryy zr, qrnerfg Ivpgbe.  Nafjre zr, V pbawher lbh ol bhe zhghny
unccvarff, jvgu fvzcyr gehgu--Qb lbh abg ybir nabgure?

"Lbh unir geniryyrq; lbh unir fcrag frireny lrnef bs lbhe yvsr ng
Vatbyfgnqg; naq V pbasrff gb lbh, zl sevraq, gung jura V fnj lbh ynfg
nhghza fb haunccl, sylvat gb fbyvghqr sebz gur fbpvrgl bs rirel
perngher, V pbhyq abg uryc fhccbfvat gung lbh zvtug erterg bhe
pbaarpgvba naq oryvrir lbhefrys obhaq va ubabhe gb shysvy gur jvfurf bs
lbhe cneragf, nygubhtu gurl bccbfrq gurzfryirf gb lbhe vapyvangvbaf.
Ohg guvf vf snyfr ernfbavat.  V pbasrff gb lbh, zl sevraq, gung V ybir
lbh naq gung va zl nvel qernzf bs shghevgl lbh unir orra zl pbafgnag
sevraq naq pbzcnavba.   Ohg vg vf lbhe unccvarff V qrfver nf jryy nf zl
bja jura V qrpyner gb lbh gung bhe zneevntr jbhyq eraqre zr rgreanyyl
zvfrenoyr hayrff vg jrer gur qvpgngr bs lbhe bja serr pubvpr.  Rira abj
V jrrc gb guvax gung, obear qbja nf lbh ner ol gur pehryyrfg
zvfsbegharf, lbh znl fgvsyr, ol gur jbeq 'ubabhe,' nyy ubcr bs gung
ybir naq unccvarff juvpu jbhyq nybar erfgber lbh gb lbhefrys.  V, jub
unir fb qvfvagrerfgrq na nssrpgvba sbe lbh, znl vapernfr lbhe zvfrevrf
grasbyq ol orvat na bofgnpyr gb lbhe jvfurf.  Nu! Ivpgbe, or nffherq
gung lbhe pbhfva naq cynlzngr unf gbb fvaprer n ybir sbe lbh abg gb or
znqr zvfrenoyr ol guvf fhccbfvgvba.  Or unccl, zl sevraq; naq vs lbh
borl zr va guvf bar erdhrfg, erznva fngvfsvrq gung abguvat ba rnegu
jvyy unir gur cbjre gb vagreehcg zl genadhvyyvgl.

"Qb abg yrg guvf yrggre qvfgheo lbh; qb abg nafjre gbzbeebj, be gur
arkg qnl, be rira hagvy lbh pbzr, vs vg jvyy tvir lbh cnva.  Zl hapyr
jvyy fraq zr arjf bs lbhe urnygu, naq vs V frr ohg bar fzvyr ba lbhe
yvcf jura jr zrrg, bppnfvbarq ol guvf be nal bgure rkregvba bs zvar, V
funyy arrq ab bgure unccvarff.

                                                "Ryvmnorgu Yniramn


    "Trarin, Znl 18gu, 17--"


Guvf yrggre erivirq va zl zrzbel jung V unq orsber sbetbggra, gur
guerng bs gur svraq--"V JVYY OR JVGU LBH BA LBHE JRQQVAT-AVTUG!" Fhpu
jnf zl fragrapr, naq ba gung avtug jbhyq gur qnrzba rzcybl rirel neg gb
qrfgebl zr naq grne zr sebz gur tyvzcfr bs unccvarff juvpu cebzvfrq
cnegyl gb pbafbyr zl fhssrevatf.  Ba gung avtug ur unq qrgrezvarq gb
pbafhzzngr uvf pevzrf ol zl qrngu.  Jryy, or vg fb; n qrnqyl fgehttyr
jbhyq gura nffherqyl gnxr cynpr, va juvpu vs ur jrer ivpgbevbhf V
fubhyq or ng crnpr naq uvf cbjre bire zr or ng na raq.  Vs ur jrer
inadhvfurq, V fubhyq or n serr zna.  Nynf!  Jung serrqbz?  Fhpu nf gur
crnfnag rawblf jura uvf snzvyl unir orra znffnperq orsber uvf rlrf, uvf
pbggntr oheag, uvf ynaqf ynvq jnfgr, naq ur vf ghearq nqevsg, ubzryrff,
craavyrff, naq nybar, ohg serr. Fhpu jbhyq or zl yvoregl rkprcg gung va
zl Ryvmnorgu V cbffrffrq n gernfher, nynf, onynaprq ol gubfr ubeebef bs
erzbefr naq thvyg juvpu jbhyq chefhr zr hagvy qrngu.

Fjrrg naq orybirq Ryvmnorgu!  V ernq naq erernq ure yrggre, naq fbzr
fbsgrarq srryvatf fgbyr vagb zl urneg naq qnerq gb juvfcre cnenqvfvnpny
qernzf bs ybir naq wbl; ohg gur nccyr jnf nyernql rngra, naq gur
natry'f nez onerq gb qevir zr sebz nyy ubcr.  Lrg V jbhyq qvr gb znxr
ure unccl.  Vs gur zbafgre rkrphgrq uvf guerng, qrngu jnf varivgnoyr;
lrg, ntnva, V pbafvqrerq jurgure zl zneevntr jbhyq unfgra zl sngr.  Zl
qrfgehpgvba zvtug vaqrrq neevir n srj zbaguf fbbare, ohg vs zl gbeghere
fubhyq fhfcrpg gung V cbfgcbarq vg, vasyhraprq ol uvf zranprf, ur jbhyq
fheryl svaq bgure naq creuncf zber qernqshy zrnaf bs eriratr.

Ur unq ibjrq GB OR JVGU ZR BA ZL JRQQVAT-AVTUG, lrg ur qvq abg pbafvqre
gung guerng nf ovaqvat uvz gb crnpr va gur zrnagvzr, sbe nf vs gb fubj
zr gung ur jnf abg lrg fngvngrq jvgu oybbq, ur unq zheqrerq Pyreiny
vzzrqvngryl nsgre gur rahapvngvba bs uvf guerngf.  V erfbyirq,
gurersber, gung vs zl vzzrqvngr havba jvgu zl pbhfva jbhyq pbaqhpr
rvgure gb uref be zl sngure'f unccvarff, zl nqirefnel'f qrfvtaf ntnvafg
zl yvsr fubhyq abg ergneq vg n fvatyr ubhe.

Va guvf fgngr bs zvaq V jebgr gb Ryvmnorgu.  Zl yrggre jnf pnyz naq
nssrpgvbangr.  "V srne, zl orybirq tvey," V fnvq, "yvggyr unccvarff
erznvaf sbe hf ba rnegu; lrg nyy gung V znl bar qnl rawbl vf pragerq va
lbh.  Punfr njnl lbhe vqyr srnef; gb lbh nybar qb V pbafrpengr zl yvsr
naq zl raqrnibhef sbe pbagragzrag.  V unir bar frperg, Ryvmnorgu, n
qernqshy bar; jura erirnyrq gb lbh, vg jvyy puvyy lbhe senzr jvgu
ubeebe, naq gura, sne sebz orvat fhecevfrq ng zl zvfrel, lbh jvyy bayl
jbaqre gung V fheivir jung V unir raqherq.  V jvyy pbasvqr guvf gnyr bs
zvfrel naq greebe gb lbh gur qnl nsgre bhe zneevntr funyy gnxr cynpr,
sbe, zl fjrrg pbhfva, gurer zhfg or cresrpg pbasvqrapr orgjrra hf.  Ohg
hagvy gura, V pbawher lbh, qb abg zragvba be nyyhqr gb vg.  Guvf V zbfg
rnearfgyl ragerng, naq V xabj lbh jvyy pbzcyl."

Va nobhg n jrrx nsgre gur neeviny bs Ryvmnorgu'f yrggre jr erghearq gb
Trarin.  Gur fjrrg tvey jrypbzrq zr jvgu jnez nssrpgvba, lrg grnef jrer
va ure rlrf nf fur oruryq zl rznpvngrq senzr naq srirevfu  purrxf.  V
fnj n punatr va ure nyfb.  Fur jnf guvaare naq unq ybfg zhpu bs gung
urnirayl ivinpvgl gung unq orsber punezrq zr; ohg ure tragyrarff naq
fbsg ybbxf bs pbzcnffvba znqr ure n zber svg pbzcnavba sbe bar oynfgrq
naq zvfrenoyr nf V jnf.  Gur genadhvyyvgl juvpu V abj rawblrq qvq abg
raqher.  Zrzbel oebhtug znqarff jvgu vg, naq jura V gubhtug bs jung unq
cnffrq, n erny vafnavgl cbffrffrq zr; fbzrgvzrf V jnf shevbhf naq oheag
jvgu entr, fbzrgvzrf ybj naq qrfcbaqrag.  V arvgure fcbxr abe ybbxrq ng
nalbar, ohg fng zbgvbayrff, orjvyqrerq ol gur zhygvghqr bs zvfrevrf
gung birepnzr zr.

Ryvmnorgu nybar unq gur cbjre gb qenj zr sebz gurfr svgf; ure tragyr
ibvpr jbhyq fbbgur zr jura genafcbegrq ol cnffvba naq vafcver zr jvgu
uhzna srryvatf jura fhax va gbecbe.  Fur jrcg jvgu zr naq sbe zr.  Jura
ernfba erghearq, fur jbhyq erzbafgengr naq raqrnibhe gb vafcver zr jvgu
erfvtangvba.  Nu!  Vg vf jryy sbe gur hasbeghangr gb or erfvtarq, ohg
sbe gur thvygl gurer vf ab crnpr.  Gur ntbavrf bs erzbefr cbvfba gur
yhkhel gurer vf bgurejvfr fbzrgvzrf sbhaq va vaqhytvat gur rkprff bs
tevrs.  Fbba nsgre zl neeviny zl sngure fcbxr bs zl vzzrqvngr zneevntr
jvgu Ryvmnorgu.  V erznvarq fvyrag.

"Unir lbh, gura, fbzr bgure nggnpuzrag?"

"Abar ba rnegu.  V ybir Ryvmnorgu naq ybbx sbejneq gb bhe havba jvgu
qryvtug.  Yrg gur qnl gurersber or svkrq; naq ba vg V jvyy pbafrpengr
zlfrys, va yvsr be qrngu, gb gur unccvarff bs zl pbhfva."

"Zl qrne Ivpgbe, qb abg fcrnx guhf.  Urnil zvfsbegharf unir orsnyyra
hf, ohg yrg hf bayl pyvat pybfre gb jung erznvaf naq genafsre bhe ybir
sbe gubfr jubz jr unir ybfg gb gubfr jub lrg yvir.  Bhe pvepyr jvyy or
fznyy ohg obhaq pybfr ol gur gvrf bs nssrpgvba naq zhghny zvfsbeghar.
Naq jura gvzr funyy unir fbsgrarq lbhe qrfcnve, arj naq qrne bowrpgf bs
pner jvyy or obea gb ercynpr gubfr bs jubz jr unir orra fb pehryyl
qrcevirq."

Fhpu jrer gur yrffbaf bs zl sngure.  Ohg gb zr gur erzrzoenapr bs gur
guerng erghearq; abe pna lbh jbaqre gung, bzavcbgrag nf gur svraq unq
lrg orra va uvf qrrqf bs oybbq, V fubhyq nyzbfg ertneq uvz nf
vaivapvoyr, naq gung jura ur unq cebabhaprq gur jbeqf "V FUNYY OR JVGU
LBH BA LBHE JRQQVAT-AVTUG," V fubhyq ertneq gur guerngrarq sngr nf
hanibvqnoyr.  Ohg qrngu jnf ab rivy gb zr vs gur ybff bs Ryvmnorgu jrer
onynaprq jvgu vg, naq V gurersber, jvgu n pbagragrq naq rira purreshy
pbhagranapr, nterrq jvgu zl sngure gung vs zl pbhfva jbhyq pbafrag, gur
prerzbal fubhyq gnxr cynpr va gra qnlf, naq guhf chg, nf V vzntvarq,
gur frny gb zl sngr.

Terng Tbq!  Vs sbe bar vafgnag V unq gubhtug jung zvtug or gur uryyvfu
vagragvba bs zl svraqvfu nqirefnel, V jbhyq engure unir onavfurq zlfrys
sberire sebz zl angvir pbhagel naq jnaqrerq n sevraqyrff bhgpnfg bire
gur rnegu guna unir pbafragrq gb guvf zvfrenoyr zneevntr.  Ohg, nf vs
cbffrffrq bs zntvp cbjref, gur zbafgre unq oyvaqrq zr gb uvf erny
vagragvbaf; naq jura V gubhtug gung V unq cercnerq bayl zl bja qrngu, V
unfgrarq gung bs n sne qrnere ivpgvz.

Nf gur crevbq svkrq sbe bhe zneevntr qerj arnere, jurgure sebz
pbjneqvpr be n cebcurgvp srryvat, V sryg zl urneg fvax jvguva zr.  Ohg
V pbaprnyrq zl srryvatf ol na nccrnenapr bs uvynevgl gung oebhtug
fzvyrf naq wbl gb gur pbhagranapr bs zl sngure, ohg uneqyl qrprvirq gur
rire-jngpushy naq avpre rlr bs Ryvmnorgu.  Fur ybbxrq sbejneq gb bhe
havba jvgu cynpvq pbagragzrag, abg hazvatyrq jvgu n yvggyr srne, juvpu
cnfg zvfsbegharf unq vzcerffrq, gung jung abj nccrnerq pregnva naq
gnatvoyr unccvarff zvtug fbba qvffvcngr vagb na nvel qernz naq yrnir ab
genpr ohg qrrc naq rireynfgvat erterg.  Cercnengvbaf jrer znqr sbe gur
rirag, pbatenghyngbel ivfvgf jrer erprvirq, naq nyy jber n fzvyvat
nccrnenapr.  V fuhg hc, nf jryy nf V pbhyq, va zl bja urneg gur nakvrgl
gung cerlrq gurer naq ragrerq jvgu frrzvat rnearfgarff vagb gur cynaf
bs zl sngure, nygubhtu gurl zvtug bayl freir nf gur qrpbengvbaf bs zl
gentrql.  Guebhtu zl sngure'f rkregvbaf n cneg bs gur vaurevgnapr bs
Ryvmnorgu unq orra erfgberq gb ure ol gur Nhfgevna tbireazrag.  N fznyy
cbffrffvba ba gur fuberf bs Pbzb orybatrq gb ure.  Vg jnf nterrq gung,
vzzrqvngryl nsgre bhe havba, jr fubhyq cebprrq gb Ivyyn Yniramn naq
fcraq bhe svefg qnlf bs unccvarff orfvqr gur ornhgvshy ynxr arne juvpu
vg fgbbq.

Va gur zrnagvzr V gbbx rirel cerpnhgvba gb qrsraq zl crefba va pnfr gur
svraq fubhyq bcrayl nggnpx zr.  V pneevrq cvfgbyf naq n qnttre
pbafgnagyl nobhg zr naq jnf rire ba gur jngpu gb cerirag negvsvpr, naq
ol gurfr zrnaf tnvarq n terngre qrterr bs genadhvyyvgl.  Vaqrrq, nf gur
crevbq nccebnpurq, gur guerng nccrnerq zber nf n qryhfvba, abg gb or
ertneqrq nf jbegul gb qvfgheo zl crnpr, juvyr gur unccvarff V ubcrq sbe
va zl zneevntr jber n terngre nccrnenapr bs pregnvagl nf gur qnl svkrq
sbe vgf fbyrzavmngvba qerj arnere naq V urneq vg pbagvahnyyl fcbxra bs
nf na bppheerapr juvpu ab nppvqrag pbhyq cbffvoyl cerirag.

Ryvmnorgu frrzrq unccl; zl genadhvy qrzrnabhe pbagevohgrq terngyl gb
pnyz ure zvaq.  Ohg ba gur qnl gung jnf gb shysvy zl jvfurf naq zl
qrfgval, fur jnf zrynapubyl, naq n cerfragvzrag bs rivy creinqrq ure;
naq creuncf nyfb fur gubhtug bs gur qernqshy frperg juvpu V unq
cebzvfrq gb erirny gb ure ba gur sbyybjvat qnl.  Zl sngure jnf va gur
zrnagvzr birewblrq naq va gur ohfgyr bs cercnengvba bayl erpbtavmrq va
gur zrynapubyl bs uvf avrpr gur qvssvqrapr bs n oevqr.

Nsgre gur prerzbal jnf cresbezrq n ynetr cnegl nffrzoyrq ng zl
sngure'f, ohg vg jnf nterrq gung Ryvmnorgu naq V fubhyq pbzzrapr bhe
wbhearl ol jngre, fyrrcvat gung avtug ng Rivna naq pbagvahvat bhe
iblntr ba gur sbyybjvat qnl.  Gur qnl jnf snve, gur jvaq snibhenoyr;
nyy fzvyrq ba bhe ahcgvny rzonexngvba.

Gubfr jrer gur ynfg zbzragf bs zl yvsr qhevat juvpu V rawblrq gur
srryvat bs unccvarff.  Jr cnffrq encvqyl nybat; gur fha jnf ubg, ohg jr
jrer furygrerq sebz vgf enlf ol n xvaq bs pnabcl juvyr jr rawblrq gur
ornhgl bs gur fprar, fbzrgvzrf ba bar fvqr bs gur ynxr, jurer jr fnj
Zbag Fnyrir, gur cyrnfnag onaxf bs Zbagnyrter, naq ng n qvfgnapr,
fhezbhagvat nyy, gur ornhgvshy Zbag Oynap naq gur nffrzoyntr bs fabjl
zbhagnvaf gung va inva raqrnibhe gb rzhyngr ure; fbzrgvzrf pbnfgvat gur
bccbfvgr onaxf, jr fnj gur zvtugl When bccbfvat vgf qnex fvqr gb gur
nzovgvba gung jbhyq dhvg vgf angvir pbhagel, naq na nyzbfg
vafhezbhagnoyr oneevre gb gur vainqre jub fubhyq jvfu gb rafynir vg.

V gbbx gur unaq bs Ryvmnorgu.  "Lbh ner fbeebjshy, zl ybir.  Nu!  Vs
lbh xarj jung V unir fhssrerq naq jung V znl lrg raqher, lbh jbhyq
raqrnibhe gb yrg zr gnfgr gur dhvrg naq serrqbz sebz qrfcnve gung guvf
bar qnl ng yrnfg crezvgf zr gb rawbl."

"Or unccl, zl qrne Ivpgbe," ercyvrq Ryvmnorgu; "gurer vf, V ubcr,
abguvat gb qvfgerff lbh; naq or nffherq gung vs n yviryl wbl vf abg
cnvagrq va zl snpr, zl urneg vf pbagragrq.  Fbzrguvat juvfcref gb zr
abg gb qrcraq gbb zhpu ba gur cebfcrpg gung vf bcrarq orsber hf, ohg V
jvyy abg yvfgra gb fhpu n fvavfgre ibvpr.  Bofreir ubj snfg jr zbir
nybat naq ubj gur pybhqf, juvpu fbzrgvzrf bofpher naq fbzrgvzrf evfr
nobir gur qbzr bs Zbag Oynap, eraqre guvf fprar bs ornhgl fgvyy zber
vagrerfgvat.  Ybbx nyfb ng gur vaahzrenoyr svfu gung ner fjvzzvat va
gur pyrne jngref, jurer jr pna qvfgvathvfu rirel crooyr gung yvrf ng
gur obggbz.  Jung n qvivar qnl!  Ubj unccl naq frerar nyy angher
nccrnef!"

Guhf Ryvmnorgu raqrnibherq gb qvireg ure gubhtugf naq zvar sebz nyy
ersyrpgvba hcba zrynapubyl fhowrpgf.  Ohg ure grzcre jnf syhpghngvat;
wbl sbe n srj vafgnagf fubar va ure rlrf, ohg vg pbagvahnyyl tnir cynpr
gb qvfgenpgvba naq erirevr.

Gur fha fnax ybjre va gur urniraf; jr cnffrq gur evire Qenapr naq
bofreirq vgf cngu guebhtu gur punfzf bs gur uvture naq gur tyraf bs gur
ybjre uvyyf.  Gur Nycf urer pbzr pybfre gb gur ynxr, naq jr nccebnpurq
gur nzcuvgurnger bs zbhagnvaf juvpu sbezf vgf rnfgrea obhaqnel.  Gur
fcver bs Rivna fubar haqre gur jbbqf gung fheebhaqrq vg naq gur enatr
bs zbhagnva nobir zbhagnva ol juvpu vg jnf bireuhat.

Gur jvaq, juvpu unq uvguregb pneevrq hf nybat jvgu nznmvat encvqvgl,
fnax ng fhafrg gb n yvtug oerrmr; gur fbsg nve whfg ehssyrq gur jngre
naq pnhfrq n cyrnfnag zbgvba nzbat gur gerrf nf jr nccebnpurq gur
fuber, sebz juvpu vg jnsgrq gur zbfg qryvtugshy fprag bs sybjref naq
unl.  Gur fha fnax orarngu gur ubevmba nf jr ynaqrq, naq nf V gbhpurq
gur fuber V sryg gubfr pnerf naq srnef erivir juvpu fbba jrer gb pynfc
zr naq pyvat gb zr sberire.



Puncgre 23

Vg jnf rvtug b'pybpx jura jr ynaqrq; jr jnyxrq sbe n fubeg gvzr ba gur
fuber, rawblvat gur genafvgbel yvtug, naq gura ergverq gb gur vaa naq
pbagrzcyngrq gur ybiryl fprar bs jngref, jbbqf, naq zbhagnvaf, bofpherq
va qnexarff, lrg fgvyy qvfcynlvat gurve oynpx bhgyvarf.

Gur jvaq, juvpu unq snyyra va gur fbhgu, abj ebfr jvgu terng ivbyrapr
va gur jrfg.  Gur zbba unq ernpurq ure fhzzvg va gur urniraf naq jnf
ortvaavat gb qrfpraq; gur pybhqf fjrcg npebff vg fjvsgre guna gur
syvtug bs gur ihygher naq qvzzrq ure enlf, juvyr gur ynxr ersyrpgrq gur
fprar bs gur ohfl urniraf, eraqrerq fgvyy ohfvre ol gur erfgyrff jnirf
gung jrer ortvaavat gb evfr.  Fhqqrayl n urnil fgbez bs enva qrfpraqrq.

V unq orra pnyz qhevat gur qnl, ohg fb fbba nf avtug bofpherq gur
funcrf bs bowrpgf, n gubhfnaq srnef nebfr va zl zvaq.  V jnf nakvbhf
naq jngpushy, juvyr zl evtug unaq tenfcrq n cvfgby juvpu jnf uvqqra va
zl obfbz; rirel fbhaq greevsvrq zr, ohg V erfbyirq gung V jbhyq fryy zl
yvsr qrneyl naq abg fuevax sebz gur pbasyvpg hagvy zl bja yvsr be gung
bs zl nqirefnel jnf rkgvathvfurq.  Ryvmnorgu bofreirq zl ntvgngvba sbe
fbzr gvzr va gvzvq naq srneshy fvyrapr, ohg gurer jnf fbzrguvat va zl
tynapr juvpu pbzzhavpngrq greebe gb ure, naq gerzoyvat, fur nfxrq,
"Jung vf vg gung ntvgngrf lbh, zl qrne Ivpgbe?  Jung vf vg lbh srne?"

"Bu!  Crnpr, crnpr, zl ybir," ercyvrq V; "guvf avtug, naq nyy jvyy or
fnsr; ohg guvf avtug vf qernqshy, irel qernqshy."

V cnffrq na ubhe va guvf fgngr bs zvaq, jura fhqqrayl V ersyrpgrq ubj
srneshy gur pbzong juvpu V zbzragnevyl rkcrpgrq jbhyq or gb zl jvsr,
naq V rnearfgyl ragerngrq ure gb ergver, erfbyivat abg gb wbva ure
hagvy V unq bognvarq fbzr xabjyrqtr nf gb gur fvghngvba bs zl rarzl.

Fur yrsg zr, naq V pbagvahrq fbzr gvzr jnyxvat hc naq qbja gur cnffntrf
bs gur ubhfr naq vafcrpgvat rirel pbeare gung zvtug nssbeq n ergerng gb
zl nqirefnel.  Ohg V qvfpbirerq ab genpr bs uvz naq jnf ortvaavat gb
pbawrpgher gung fbzr sbeghangr punapr unq vagreirarq gb cerirag gur
rkrphgvba bs uvf zranprf jura fhqqrayl V urneq n fuevyy naq qernqshy
fpernz.  Vg pnzr sebz gur ebbz vagb juvpu Ryvmnorgu unq ergverq.  Nf V
urneq vg, gur jubyr gehgu ehfurq vagb zl zvaq, zl nezf qebccrq, gur
zbgvba bs rirel zhfpyr naq svoer jnf fhfcraqrq; V pbhyq srry gur oybbq
gevpxyvat va zl irvaf naq gvatyvat va gur rkgerzvgvrf bs zl yvzof. Guvf
fgngr ynfgrq ohg sbe na vafgnag; gur fpernz jnf ercrngrq, naq V ehfurq
vagb gur ebbz.  Terng Tbq!  Jul qvq V abg gura rkcver!  Jul nz V urer
gb eryngr gur qrfgehpgvba bs gur orfg ubcr naq gur cherfg perngher ba
rnegu?  Fur jnf gurer, yvsryrff naq vanavzngr, guebja npebff gur orq,
ure urnq unatvat qbja naq ure cnyr naq qvfgbegrq srngherf unys pbirerq
ol ure unve.  Rireljurer V ghea V frr gur fnzr svther--ure oybbqyrff
nezf naq erynkrq sbez syhat ol gur zheqrere ba vgf oevqny ovre.  Pbhyq
V orubyq guvf naq yvir?  Nynf!  Yvsr vf bofgvangr naq pyvatf pybfrfg
jurer vg vf zbfg ungrq.  Sbe n zbzrag bayl qvq V ybfr erpbyyrpgvba; V
sryy frafryrff ba gur tebhaq.

Jura V erpbirerq V sbhaq zlfrys fheebhaqrq ol gur crbcyr bs gur vaa;
gurve pbhagranaprf rkcerffrq n oernguyrff greebe, ohg gur ubeebe bs
bguref nccrnerq bayl nf n zbpxrel, n funqbj bs gur srryvatf gung
bccerffrq zr.  V rfpncrq sebz gurz gb gur ebbz jurer ynl gur obql bs
Ryvmnorgu, zl ybir, zl jvsr, fb yngryl yvivat, fb qrne, fb jbegul.  Fur
unq orra zbirq sebz gur cbfgher va juvpu V unq svefg oruryq ure, naq
abj, nf fur ynl, ure urnq hcba ure nez naq n unaqxrepuvrs guebja npebff
ure snpr naq arpx, V zvtug unir fhccbfrq ure nfyrrc. V ehfurq gbjneqf
ure naq rzoenprq ure jvgu neqbhe, ohg gur qrnqyl ynathbe naq pbyqarff
bs gur yvzof gbyq zr gung jung V abj uryq va zl nezf unq prnfrq gb or
gur Ryvmnorgu jubz V unq ybirq naq purevfurq.  Gur zheqrebhf znex bs
gur svraq'f tenfc jnf ba ure arpx, naq gur oerngu unq prnfrq gb vffhr
sebz ure yvcf.  Juvyr V fgvyy uhat bire ure va gur ntbal bs qrfcnve, V
unccrarq gb ybbx hc.  Gur jvaqbjf bs gur ebbz unq orsber orra qnexrarq,
naq V sryg n xvaq bs cnavp ba frrvat gur cnyr lryybj yvtug bs gur zbba
vyyhzvangr gur punzore.  Gur fuhggref unq orra guebja onpx, naq jvgu n
frafngvba bs ubeebe abg gb or qrfpevorq, V fnj ng gur bcra jvaqbj n
svther gur zbfg uvqrbhf naq noubeerq.  N teva jnf ba gur snpr bs gur
zbafgre; ur frrzrq gb wrre, nf jvgu uvf svraqvfu svatre ur cbvagrq
gbjneqf gur pbecfr bs zl jvsr.  V ehfurq gbjneqf gur jvaqbj, naq
qenjvat n cvfgby sebz zl obfbz, sverq; ohg ur ryhqrq zr, yrncrq sebz
uvf fgngvba, naq ehaavat jvgu gur fjvsgarff bs yvtugavat, cyhatrq vagb
gur ynxr.

Gur ercbeg bs gur cvfgby oebhtug n pebjq vagb gur ebbz. V cbvagrq gb
gur fcbg jurer ur unq qvfnccrnerq, naq jr sbyybjrq gur genpx jvgu
obngf; argf jrer pnfg, ohg va inva.  Nsgre cnffvat frireny ubhef, jr
erghearq ubcryrff, zbfg bs zl pbzcnavbaf oryvrivat vg gb unir orra n
sbez pbawherq hc ol zl snapl.  Nsgre univat ynaqrq, gurl cebprrqrq gb
frnepu gur pbhagel, cnegvrf tbvat va qvssrerag qverpgvbaf nzbat gur
jbbqf naq ivarf.

V nggrzcgrq gb nppbzcnal gurz naq cebprrqrq n fubeg qvfgnapr sebz gur
ubhfr, ohg zl urnq juveyrq ebhaq, zl fgrcf jrer yvxr gubfr bs n qehaxra
zna, V sryy ng ynfg va n fgngr bs hggre rkunhfgvba; n svyz pbirerq zl
rlrf, naq zl fxva jnf cnepurq jvgu gur urng bs srire.  Va guvf fgngr V
jnf pneevrq onpx naq cynprq ba n orq, uneqyl pbafpvbhf bs jung unq
unccrarq; zl rlrf jnaqrerq ebhaq gur ebbz nf vs gb frrx fbzrguvat gung
V unq ybfg.

Nsgre na vagreiny V nebfr, naq nf vs ol vafgvapg, penjyrq vagb gur ebbz
jurer gur pbecfr bs zl orybirq ynl.  Gurer jrer jbzra jrrcvat nebhaq; V
uhat bire vg naq wbvarq zl fnq grnef gb gurvef; nyy guvf gvzr ab
qvfgvapg vqrn cerfragrq vgfrys gb zl zvaq, ohg zl gubhtugf enzoyrq gb
inevbhf fhowrpgf, ersyrpgvat pbashfrqyl ba zl zvfsbegharf naq gurve
pnhfr.  V jnf orjvyqrerq, va n pybhq bs jbaqre naq ubeebe.  Gur qrngu
bs Jvyyvnz, gur rkrphgvba bs Whfgvar, gur zheqre bs Pyreiny, naq ynfgyl
bs zl jvsr; rira ng gung zbzrag V xarj abg gung zl bayl erznvavat
sevraqf jrer fnsr sebz gur znyvtavgl bs gur svraq; zl sngure rira abj
zvtug or jevguvat haqre uvf tenfc, naq Rearfg zvtug or qrnq ng uvf
srrg.  Guvf vqrn znqr zr fuhqqre naq erpnyyrq zr gb npgvba.  V fgnegrq
hc naq erfbyirq gb erghea gb Trarin jvgu nyy cbffvoyr fcrrq.

Gurer jrer ab ubefrf gb or cebpherq, naq V zhfg erghea ol gur ynxr; ohg
gur jvaq jnf hasnibhenoyr, naq gur enva sryy va gbeeragf.  Ubjrire, vg
jnf uneqyl zbeavat, naq V zvtug ernfbanoyl ubcr gb neevir ol avtug.  V
uverq zra gb ebj naq gbbx na bne zlfrys, sbe V unq nyjnlf rkcrevraprq
eryvrs sebz zragny gbezrag va obqvyl rkrepvfr.  Ohg gur biresybjvat
zvfrel V abj sryg, naq gur rkprff bs ntvgngvba gung V raqherq eraqrerq
zr vapncnoyr bs nal rkregvba.  V guerj qbja gur bne, naq yrnavat zl
urnq hcba zl unaqf, tnir jnl gb rirel tybbzl vqrn gung nebfr.  Vs V
ybbxrq hc, V fnj fprarf juvpu jrer snzvyvne gb zr va zl unccvre gvzr
naq juvpu V unq pbagrzcyngrq ohg gur qnl orsber va gur pbzcnal bs ure
jub jnf abj ohg n funqbj naq n erpbyyrpgvba.  Grnef fgernzrq sebz zl
rlrf.  Gur enva unq prnfrq sbe n zbzrag, naq V fnj gur svfu cynl va gur
jngref nf gurl unq qbar n srj ubhef orsber; gurl unq gura orra bofreirq
ol Ryvmnorgu.  Abguvat vf fb cnvashy gb gur uhzna zvaq nf n terng naq
fhqqra punatr.  Gur fha zvtug fuvar be gur pybhqf zvtug ybjre, ohg
abguvat pbhyq nccrne gb zr nf vg unq qbar gur qnl orsber.  N svraq unq
fangpurq sebz zr rirel ubcr bs shgher unccvarff; ab perngher unq rire
orra fb zvfrenoyr nf V jnf; fb sevtugshy na rirag vf fvatyr va gur
uvfgbel bs zna. Ohg jul fubhyq V qjryy hcba gur vapvqragf gung sbyybjrq
guvf ynfg birejuryzvat rirag?  Zvar unf orra n gnyr bs ubeebef; V unir
ernpurq gurve npzr, naq jung V zhfg abj eryngr pna ohg or grqvbhf gb
lbh.  Xabj gung, bar ol bar, zl sevraqf jrer fangpurq njnl; V jnf yrsg
qrfbyngr.  Zl bja fgeratgu vf rkunhfgrq, naq V zhfg gryy, va n srj
jbeqf, jung erznvaf bs zl uvqrbhf aneengvba. V neevirq ng Trarin.  Zl
sngure naq Rearfg lrg yvirq, ohg gur sbezre fhax haqre gur gvqvatf gung
V ober.  V frr uvz abj, rkpryyrag naq irarenoyr byq zna!  Uvf rlrf
jnaqrerq va inpnapl, sbe gurl unq ybfg gurve punez naq gurve
qryvtug--uvf Ryvmnorgu, uvf zber guna qnhtugre, jubz ur qbgrq ba jvgu
nyy gung nssrpgvba juvpu n zna srryf, jub va gur qrpyvar bs yvsr,
univat srj nssrpgvbaf, pyvatf zber rnearfgyl gb gubfr gung erznva.
Phefrq, phefrq or gur svraq gung oebhtug zvfrel ba uvf terl unvef naq
qbbzrq uvz gb jnfgr va jergpurqarff!  Ur pbhyq abg yvir haqre gur
ubeebef gung jrer npphzhyngrq nebhaq uvz; gur fcevatf bs rkvfgrapr
fhqqrayl tnir jnl; ur jnf hanoyr gb evfr sebz uvf orq, naq va n srj
qnlf ur qvrq va zl nezf.

Jung gura orpnzr bs zr?  V xabj abg; V ybfg frafngvba, naq punvaf naq
qnexarff jrer gur bayl bowrpgf gung cerffrq hcba zr.  Fbzrgvzrf,
vaqrrq, V qernzg gung V jnaqrerq va sybjrel zrnqbjf naq cyrnfnag inyrf
jvgu gur sevraqf bs zl lbhgu, ohg V njbxr naq sbhaq zlfrys va n
qhatrba.  Zrynapubyl sbyybjrq, ohg ol qrterrf V tnvarq n pyrne
pbaprcgvba bs zl zvfrevrf naq fvghngvba naq jnf gura eryrnfrq sebz zl
cevfba.  Sbe gurl unq pnyyrq zr znq, naq qhevat znal zbaguf, nf V
haqrefgbbq, n fbyvgnel pryy unq orra zl unovgngvba.

Yvoregl, ubjrire, unq orra n hfryrff tvsg gb zr, unq V abg, nf V
njnxrarq gb ernfba, ng gur fnzr gvzr njnxrarq gb eriratr.  Nf gur
zrzbel bs cnfg zvfsbegharf cerffrq hcba zr, V ortna gb ersyrpg ba gurve
pnhfr--gur zbafgre jubz V unq perngrq, gur zvfrenoyr qnrzba jubz V unq
frag noebnq vagb gur jbeyq sbe zl qrfgehpgvba.  V jnf cbffrffrq ol n
znqqravat entr jura V gubhtug bs uvz, naq qrfverq naq neqragyl cenlrq
gung V zvtug unir uvz jvguva zl tenfc gb jernx n terng naq fvtany
eriratr ba uvf phefrq urnq.

Abe qvq zl ungr ybat pbasvar vgfrys gb hfryrff jvfurf; V ortna gb
ersyrpg ba gur orfg zrnaf bs frphevat uvz; naq sbe guvf checbfr, nobhg
n zbagu nsgre zl eryrnfr, V ercnverq gb n pevzvany whqtr va gur gbja
naq gbyq uvz gung V unq na npphfngvba gb znxr, gung V xarj gur
qrfgeblre bs zl snzvyl, naq gung V erdhverq uvz gb rkreg uvf jubyr
nhgubevgl sbe gur nccerurafvba bs gur zheqrere.  Gur zntvfgengr
yvfgrarq gb zr jvgu nggragvba naq xvaqarff.

"Or nffherq, fve," fnvq ur, "ab cnvaf be rkregvbaf ba zl cneg funyy or
fcnerq gb qvfpbire gur ivyynva."

"V gunax lbh," ercyvrq V; "yvfgra, gurersber, gb gur qrcbfvgvba gung V
unir gb znxr.  Vg vf vaqrrq n gnyr fb fgenatr gung V fubhyq srne lbh
jbhyq abg perqvg vg jrer gurer abg fbzrguvat va gehgu juvpu, ubjrire
jbaqreshy, sbeprf pbaivpgvba.  Gur fgbel vf gbb pbaarpgrq gb or
zvfgnxra sbe n qernz, naq V unir ab zbgvir sbe snyfrubbq." Zl znaare nf
V guhf nqqerffrq uvz jnf vzcerffvir ohg pnyz; V unq sbezrq va zl bja
urneg n erfbyhgvba gb chefhr zl qrfgeblre gb qrngu, naq guvf checbfr
dhvrgrq zl ntbal naq sbe na vagreiny erpbapvyrq zr gb yvsr.  V abj
eryngrq zl uvfgbel oevrsyl ohg jvgu svezarff naq cerpvfvba, znexvat gur
qngrf jvgu npphenpl naq arire qrivngvat vagb vairpgvir be rkpynzngvba.

Gur zntvfgengr nccrnerq ng svefg cresrpgyl vaperqhybhf, ohg nf V
pbagvahrq ur orpnzr zber nggragvir naq vagrerfgrq; V fnj uvz fbzrgvzrf
fuhqqre jvgu ubeebe; ng bguref n yviryl fhecevfr, hazvatyrq jvgu
qvforyvrs, jnf cnvagrq ba uvf pbhagranapr.  Jura V unq pbapyhqrq zl
aneengvba V fnvq, "Guvf vf gur orvat jubz V npphfr naq sbe jubfr
frvmher naq chavfuzrag V pnyy hcba lbh gb rkreg lbhe jubyr cbjre.  Vg
vf lbhe qhgl nf n zntvfgengr, naq V oryvrir naq ubcr gung lbhe srryvatf
nf n zna jvyy abg eribyg sebz gur rkrphgvba bs gubfr shapgvbaf ba guvf
bppnfvba."  Guvf nqqerff pnhfrq n pbafvqrenoyr punatr va gur
culfvbtabzl bs zl bja nhqvgbe.  Ur unq urneq zl fgbel jvgu gung unys
xvaq bs oryvrs gung vf tvira gb n gnyr bs fcvevgf naq fhcreangheny
riragf; ohg jura ur jnf pnyyrq hcba gb npg bssvpvnyyl va pbafrdhrapr,
gur jubyr gvqr bs uvf vaperqhyvgl erghearq.  Ur, ubjrire, nafjrerq
zvyqyl, "V jbhyq jvyyvatyl nssbeq lbh rirel nvq va lbhe chefhvg, ohg
gur perngher bs jubz lbh fcrnx nccrnef gb unir cbjref juvpu jbhyq chg
nyy zl rkregvbaf gb qrsvnapr.  Jub pna sbyybj na navzny juvpu pna
genirefr gur frn bs vpr naq vaunovg pnirf naq qraf jurer ab zna jbhyq
iragher gb vagehqr?  Orfvqrf, fbzr zbaguf unir ryncfrq fvapr gur
pbzzvffvba bs uvf pevzrf, naq ab bar pna pbawrpgher gb jung cynpr ur
unf jnaqrerq be jung ertvba ur znl abj vaunovg."

"V qb abg qbhog gung ur ubiref arne gur fcbg juvpu V vaunovg, naq vs ur
unf vaqrrq gnxra ershtr va gur Nycf, ur znl or uhagrq yvxr gur punzbvf
naq qrfgeblrq nf n ornfg bs cerl.  Ohg V creprvir lbhe gubhtugf; lbh qb
abg perqvg zl aneengvir naq qb abg vagraq gb chefhr zl rarzl jvgu gur
chavfuzrag juvpu vf uvf qrfreg." Nf V fcbxr, entr fcnexyrq va zl rlrf;
gur zntvfgengr jnf vagvzvqngrq.  "Lbh ner zvfgnxra," fnvq ur.  "V jvyy
rkreg zlfrys, naq vs vg vf va zl cbjre gb frvmr gur zbafgre, or nffherq
gung ur funyy fhssre chavfuzrag cebcbegvbangr gb uvf pevzrf.  Ohg V
srne, sebz jung lbh unir lbhefrys qrfpevorq gb or uvf cebcregvrf, gung
guvf jvyy cebir vzcenpgvpnoyr; naq guhf, juvyr rirel cebcre zrnfher vf
chefhrq, lbh fubhyq znxr hc lbhe zvaq gb qvfnccbvagzrag."

"Gung pnaabg or; ohg nyy gung V pna fnl jvyy or bs yvggyr ninvy.  Zl
eriratr vf bs ab zbzrag gb lbh; lrg, juvyr V nyybj vg gb or n ivpr, V
pbasrff gung vg vf gur qribhevat naq bayl cnffvba bs zl fbhy.  Zl entr
vf hafcrnxnoyr jura V ersyrpg gung gur zheqrere, jubz V unir ghearq
ybbfr hcba fbpvrgl, fgvyy rkvfgf.  Lbh ershfr zl whfg qrznaq; V unir
ohg bar erfbhepr, naq V qribgr zlfrys, rvgure va zl yvsr be qrngu, gb
uvf qrfgehpgvba."

V gerzoyrq jvgu rkprff bs ntvgngvba nf V fnvq guvf; gurer jnf n seraml
va zl znaare, naq fbzrguvat, V qbhog abg, bs gung unhtugl svreprarff
juvpu gur zneglef bs byq ner fnvq gb unir cbffrffrq.  Ohg gb n Trarina
zntvfgengr, jubfr zvaq jnf bpphcvrq ol sne bgure vqrnf guna gubfr bs
qribgvba naq urebvfz, guvf ryringvba bs zvaq unq zhpu gur nccrnenapr bs
znqarff.  Ur raqrnibherq gb fbbgur zr nf n ahefr qbrf n puvyq naq
eriregrq gb zl gnyr nf gur rssrpgf bs qryvevhz.

"Zna," V pevrq, "ubj vtabenag neg gubh va gul cevqr bs jvfqbz!  Prnfr;
lbh xabj abg jung vg vf lbh fnl."

V oebxr sebz gur ubhfr natel naq qvfgheorq naq ergverq gb zrqvgngr ba
fbzr bgure zbqr bs npgvba.



Puncgre 24

Zl cerfrag fvghngvba jnf bar va juvpu nyy ibyhagnel gubhtug jnf
fjnyybjrq hc naq ybfg.  V jnf uheevrq njnl ol shel; eriratr nybar
raqbjrq zr jvgu fgeratgu naq pbzcbfher; vg zbhyqrq zl srryvatf naq
nyybjrq zr gb or pnyphyngvat naq pnyz ng crevbqf jura bgurejvfr
qryvevhz be qrngu jbhyq unir orra zl cbegvba.

Zl svefg erfbyhgvba jnf gb dhvg Trarin sberire; zl pbhagel, juvpu, jura
V jnf unccl naq orybirq, jnf qrne gb zr, abj, va zl nqirefvgl, orpnzr
ungrshy.  V cebivqrq zlfrys jvgu n fhz bs zbarl, gbtrgure jvgu n srj
wrjryf juvpu unq orybatrq gb zl zbgure, naq qrcnegrq.  Naq abj zl
jnaqrevatf ortna juvpu ner gb prnfr ohg jvgu yvsr.  V unir genirefrq n
infg cbegvba bs gur rnegu naq unir raqherq nyy gur uneqfuvcf juvpu
geniryyref va qrfregf naq oneonebhf pbhagevrf ner jbag gb zrrg.  Ubj V
unir yvirq V uneqyl xabj; znal gvzrf unir V fgergpurq zl snvyvat yvzof
hcba gur fnaql cynva naq cenlrq sbe qrngu.  Ohg eriratr xrcg zr nyvir;
V qnerq abg qvr naq yrnir zl nqirefnel va orvat.

Jura V dhvggrq Trarin zl svefg ynobhe jnf gb tnva fbzr pyhr ol juvpu V
zvtug genpr gur fgrcf bs zl svraqvfu rarzl.  Ohg zl cyna jnf hafrggyrq,
naq V jnaqrerq znal ubhef ebhaq gur pbasvarf bs gur gbja, hapregnva
jung cngu V fubhyq chefhr.  Nf avtug nccebnpurq V sbhaq zlfrys ng gur
ragenapr bs gur przrgrel jurer Jvyyvnz, Ryvmnorgu, naq zl sngure
ercbfrq.  V ragrerq vg naq nccebnpurq gur gbzo juvpu znexrq gurve
tenirf.  Rirelguvat jnf fvyrag rkprcg gur yrnirf bs gur gerrf, juvpu
jrer tragyl ntvgngrq ol gur jvaq; gur avtug jnf arneyl qnex, naq gur
fprar jbhyq unir orra fbyrza naq nssrpgvat rira gb na havagrerfgrq
bofreire.  Gur fcvevgf bs gur qrcnegrq frrzrq gb syvg nebhaq naq gb
pnfg n funqbj, juvpu jnf sryg ohg abg frra, nebhaq gur urnq bs gur
zbheare.

Gur qrrc tevrs juvpu guvf fprar unq ng svefg rkpvgrq dhvpxyl tnir jnl
gb entr naq qrfcnve.  Gurl jrer qrnq, naq V yvirq; gurve zheqrere nyfb
yvirq, naq gb qrfgebl uvz V zhfg qent bhg zl jrnel rkvfgrapr.  V xaryg
ba gur tenff naq xvffrq gur rnegu naq jvgu dhvirevat yvcf rkpynvzrq,
"Ol gur fnperq rnegu ba juvpu V xarry, ol gur funqrf gung jnaqre arne
zr, ol gur qrrc naq rgreany tevrs gung V srry, V fjrne; naq ol gurr, B
Avtug, naq gur fcvevgf gung cerfvqr bire gurr, gb chefhr gur qnrzba jub
pnhfrq guvf zvfrel, hagvy ur be V funyy crevfu va zbegny pbasyvpg.  Sbe
guvf checbfr V jvyy cerfreir zl yvsr; gb rkrphgr guvf qrne eriratr jvyy
V ntnva orubyq gur fha naq gernq gur terra ureontr bs rnegu, juvpu
bgurejvfr fubhyq inavfu sebz zl rlrf sberire.  Naq V pnyy ba lbh,
fcvevgf bs gur qrnq, naq ba lbh, jnaqrevat zvavfgref bs iratrnapr, gb
nvq naq pbaqhpg zr va zl jbex.  Yrg gur phefrq naq uryyvfu zbafgre
qevax qrrc bs ntbal; yrg uvz srry gur qrfcnve gung abj gbezragf zr."  V
unq ortha zl nqwhengvba jvgu fbyrzavgl naq na njr juvpu nyzbfg nffherq
zr gung gur funqrf bs zl zheqrerq sevraqf urneq naq nccebirq zl
qribgvba, ohg gur shevrf cbffrffrq zr nf V pbapyhqrq, naq entr pubxrq
zl hggrenapr.

V jnf nafjrerq guebhtu gur fgvyyarff bs avtug ol n ybhq naq svraqvfu
ynhtu.  Vg enat ba zl rnef ybat naq urnivyl; gur zbhagnvaf er-rpubrq
vg, naq V sryg nf vs nyy uryy fheebhaqrq zr jvgu zbpxrel naq ynhtugre.
Fheryl va gung zbzrag V fubhyq unir orra cbffrffrq ol seraml naq unir
qrfgeblrq zl zvfrenoyr rkvfgrapr ohg gung zl ibj jnf urneq naq gung V
jnf erfreirq sbe iratrnapr.  Gur ynhtugre qvrq njnl, jura n jryy-xabja
naq noubeerq ibvpr, nccneragyl pybfr gb zl rne, nqqerffrq zr va na
nhqvoyr juvfcre, "V nz fngvfsvrq, zvfrenoyr jergpu!  Lbh unir
qrgrezvarq gb yvir, naq V nz fngvfsvrq."

V qnegrq gbjneqf gur fcbg sebz juvpu gur fbhaq cebprrqrq, ohg gur qrivy
ryhqrq zl tenfc.  Fhqqrayl gur oebnq qvfx bs gur zbba nebfr naq fubar
shyy hcba uvf tunfgyl naq qvfgbegrq funcr nf ur syrq jvgu zber guna
zbegny fcrrq.

V chefhrq uvz, naq sbe znal zbaguf guvf unf orra zl gnfx.  Thvqrq ol n
fyvtug pyhr, V sbyybjrq gur jvaqvatf bs gur Eubar, ohg invayl.  Gur
oyhr Zrqvgreenarna nccrnerq, naq ol n fgenatr punapr, V fnj gur svraq
ragre ol avtug naq uvqr uvzfrys va n irffry obhaq sbe gur Oynpx Frn.  V
gbbx zl cnffntr va gur fnzr fuvc, ohg ur rfpncrq, V xabj abg ubj.

Nzvqfg gur jvyqf bs Gnegnel naq Ehffvn, nygubhtu ur fgvyy rinqrq zr, V
unir rire sbyybjrq va uvf genpx.  Fbzrgvzrf gur crnfnagf, fpnerq ol
guvf ubeevq nccnevgvba, vasbezrq zr bs uvf cngu; fbzrgvzrf ur uvzfrys,
jub srnerq gung vs V ybfg nyy genpr bs uvz V fubhyq qrfcnve naq qvr,
yrsg fbzr znex gb thvqr zr.  Gur fabjf qrfpraqrq ba zl urnq, naq V fnj
gur cevag bs uvf uhtr fgrc ba gur juvgr cynva.  Gb lbh svefg ragrevat
ba yvsr, gb jubz pner vf arj naq ntbal haxabja, ubj pna lbh haqrefgnaq
jung V unir sryg naq fgvyy srry?  Pbyq, jnag, naq sngvthr jrer gur
yrnfg cnvaf juvpu V jnf qrfgvarq gb raqher; V jnf phefrq ol fbzr qrivy
naq pneevrq nobhg jvgu zr zl rgreany uryy; lrg fgvyy n fcvevg bs tbbq
sbyybjrq naq qverpgrq zl fgrcf naq jura V zbfg zhezherq jbhyq fhqqrayl
rkgevpngr zr sebz frrzvatyl vafhezbhagnoyr qvssvphygvrf.  Fbzrgvzrf,
jura angher, birepbzr ol uhatre, fnax haqre gur rkunhfgvba, n ercnfg
jnf cercnerq sbe zr va gur qrfreg gung erfgberq naq vafcvevgrq zr.  Gur
sner jnf, vaqrrq, pbnefr, fhpu nf gur crnfnagf bs gur pbhagel ngr, ohg
V jvyy abg qbhog gung vg jnf frg gurer ol gur fcvevgf gung V unq
vaibxrq gb nvq zr.  Bsgra, jura nyy jnf qel, gur urniraf pybhqyrff, naq
V jnf cnepurq ol guvefg, n fyvtug pybhq jbhyq orqvz gur fxl, furq gur
srj qebcf gung erivirq zr, naq inavfu.

V sbyybjrq, jura V pbhyq, gur pbhefrf bs gur eviref; ohg gur qnrzba
trarenyyl nibvqrq gurfr, nf vg jnf urer gung gur cbchyngvba bs gur
pbhagel puvrsyl pbyyrpgrq.  Va bgure cynprf uhzna orvatf jrer fryqbz
frra, naq V trarenyyl fhofvfgrq ba gur jvyq navznyf gung pebffrq zl
cngu.  V unq zbarl jvgu zr naq tnvarq gur sevraqfuvc bs gur ivyyntref
ol qvfgevohgvat vg; be V oebhtug jvgu zr fbzr sbbq gung V unq xvyyrq,
juvpu, nsgre gnxvat n fznyy cneg, V nyjnlf cerfragrq gb gubfr jub unq
cebivqrq zr jvgu sver naq hgrafvyf sbe pbbxvat.

Zl yvsr, nf vg cnffrq guhf, jnf vaqrrq ungrshy gb zr, naq vg jnf qhevat
fyrrc nybar gung V pbhyq gnfgr wbl.  B oyrffrq fyrrc!  Bsgra, jura zbfg
zvfrenoyr, V fnax gb ercbfr, naq zl qernzf yhyyrq zr rira gb encgher.
Gur fcvevgf gung thneqrq zr unq cebivqrq gurfr zbzragf, be engure
ubhef, bs unccvarff gung V zvtug ergnva fgeratgu gb shysvy zl
cvytevzntr.  Qrcevirq bs guvf erfcvgr, V fubhyq unir fhax haqre zl
uneqfuvcf.  Qhevat gur qnl V jnf fhfgnvarq naq vafcvevgrq ol gur ubcr
bs avtug, sbe va fyrrc V fnj zl sevraqf, zl jvsr, naq zl orybirq
pbhagel; ntnva V fnj gur oraribyrag pbhagranapr bs zl sngure, urneq gur
fvyire gbarf bs zl Ryvmnorgu'f ibvpr, naq oruryq Pyreiny rawblvat
urnygu naq lbhgu.  Bsgra, jura jrnevrq ol n gbvyfbzr znepu, V crefhnqrq
zlfrys gung V jnf qernzvat hagvy avtug fubhyq pbzr naq gung V fubhyq
gura rawbl ernyvgl va gur nezf bs zl qrnerfg sevraqf.  Jung ntbavmvat
sbaqarff qvq V srry sbe gurz!  Ubj qvq V pyvat gb gurve qrne sbezf, nf
fbzrgvzrf gurl unhagrq rira zl jnxvat ubhef, naq crefhnqr zlfrys gung
gurl fgvyy yvirq!  Ng fhpu zbzragf iratrnapr, gung ohearq jvguva zr,
qvrq va zl urneg, naq V chefhrq zl cngu gbjneqf gur qrfgehpgvba bs gur
qnrzba zber nf n gnfx rawbvarq ol urnira, nf gur zrpunavpny vzchyfr bs
fbzr cbjre bs juvpu V jnf hapbafpvbhf, guna nf gur neqrag qrfver bs zl
fbhy.  Jung uvf srryvatf jrer jubz V chefhrq V pnaabg xabj.  Fbzrgvzrf,
vaqrrq, ur yrsg znexf va jevgvat ba gur onexf bs gur gerrf be phg va
fgbar gung thvqrq zr naq vafgvtngrq zl shel.  "Zl ervta vf abg lrg
bire"--gurfr jbeqf jrer yrtvoyr va bar bs gurfr vafpevcgvbaf--"lbh
yvir, naq zl cbjre vf pbzcyrgr.  Sbyybj zr; V frrx gur rireynfgvat vprf
bs gur abegu, jurer lbh jvyy srry gur zvfrel bs pbyq naq sebfg, gb
juvpu V nz vzcnffvir.  Lbh jvyy svaq arne guvf cynpr, vs lbh sbyybj abg
gbb gneqvyl, n qrnq uner; rng naq or erserfurq.  Pbzr ba, zl rarzl; jr
unir lrg gb jerfgyr sbe bhe yvirf, ohg znal uneq naq zvfrenoyr ubhef
zhfg lbh raqher hagvy gung crevbq funyy neevir."

Fpbssvat qrivy!  Ntnva qb V ibj iratrnapr; ntnva qb V qribgr gurr,
zvfrenoyr svraq, gb gbegher naq qrngu.  Arire jvyy V tvir hc zl frnepu
hagvy ur be V crevfu; naq gura jvgu jung rpfgnfl funyy V wbva zl
Ryvmnorgu naq zl qrcnegrq sevraqf, jub rira abj cercner sbe zr gur
erjneq bs zl grqvbhf gbvy naq ubeevoyr cvytevzntr!

Nf V fgvyy chefhrq zl wbhearl gb gur abegujneq, gur fabjf guvpxrarq naq
gur pbyq vapernfrq va n qrterr nyzbfg gbb frirer gb fhccbeg.  Gur
crnfnagf jrer fuhg hc va gurve ubiryf, naq bayl n srj bs gur zbfg uneql
iragherq sbegu gb frvmr gur navznyf jubz fgneingvba unq sbeprq sebz
gurve uvqvat-cynprf gb frrx sbe cerl.  Gur eviref jrer pbirerq jvgu
vpr, naq ab svfu pbhyq or cebpherq; naq guhf V jnf phg bss sebz zl
puvrs negvpyr bs znvagranapr.  Gur gevhzcu bs zl rarzl vapernfrq jvgu
gur qvssvphygl bs zl ynobhef.  Bar vafpevcgvba gung ur yrsg jnf va
gurfr jbeqf:  "Cercner!  Lbhe gbvyf bayl ortva; jenc lbhefrys va shef
naq cebivqr sbbq, sbe jr funyy fbba ragre hcba n wbhearl jurer lbhe
fhssrevatf jvyy fngvfsl zl rireynfgvat ungerq."

Zl pbhentr naq crefrirenapr jrer vaivtbengrq ol gurfr fpbssvat jbeqf; V
erfbyirq abg gb snvy va zl checbfr, naq pnyyvat ba urnira gb fhccbeg
zr, V pbagvahrq jvgu hanongrq sreibhe gb genirefr vzzrafr qrfregf,
hagvy gur bprna nccrnerq ng n qvfgnapr naq sbezrq gur hgzbfg obhaqnel
bs gur ubevmba.  Bu!  Ubj hayvxr vg jnf gb gur oyhr frnfbaf bs gur
fbhgu!  Pbirerq jvgu vpr, vg jnf bayl gb or qvfgvathvfurq sebz ynaq ol
vgf fhcrevbe jvyqarff naq ehttrqarff.  Gur Terrxf jrcg sbe wbl jura
gurl oruryq gur Zrqvgreenarna sebz gur uvyyf bs Nfvn, naq unvyrq jvgu
encgher gur obhaqnel bs gurve gbvyf.  V qvq abg jrrc, ohg V xaryg qbja
naq jvgu n shyy urneg gunaxrq zl thvqvat fcvevg sbe pbaqhpgvat zr va
fnsrgl gb gur cynpr jurer V ubcrq, abgjvgufgnaqvat zl nqirefnel'f tvor,
gb zrrg naq tenccyr jvgu uvz.

Fbzr jrrxf orsber guvf crevbq V unq cebpherq n fyrqtr naq qbtf naq guhf
genirefrq gur fabjf jvgu vapbaprvinoyr fcrrq.  V xabj abg jurgure gur
svraq cbffrffrq gur fnzr nqinagntrf, ohg V sbhaq gung, nf orsber V unq
qnvyl ybfg tebhaq va gur chefhvg, V abj tnvarq ba uvz, fb zhpu fb gung
jura V svefg fnj gur bprna ur jnf ohg bar qnl'f wbhearl va nqinapr, naq
V ubcrq gb vagreprcg uvz orsber ur fubhyq ernpu gur ornpu.  Jvgu arj
pbhentr, gurersber, V cerffrq ba, naq va gjb qnlf neevirq ng n jergpurq
unzyrg ba gur frnfuber.  V vadhverq bs gur vaunovgnagf pbapreavat gur
svraq naq tnvarq npphengr vasbezngvba.  N tvtnagvp zbafgre, gurl fnvq,
unq neevirq gur avtug orsber, nezrq jvgu n tha naq znal cvfgbyf,
chggvat gb syvtug gur vaunovgnagf bs n fbyvgnel pbggntr guebhtu srne bs
uvf greevsvp nccrnenapr.  Ur unq pneevrq bss gurve fgber bs jvagre
sbbq, naq cynpvat vg va n fyrqtr, gb qenj juvpu ur unq frvmrq ba n
ahzrebhf qebir bs genvarq qbtf, ur unq unearffrq gurz, naq gur fnzr
avtug, gb gur wbl bs gur ubeebe-fgehpx ivyyntref, unq chefhrq uvf
wbhearl npebff gur frn va n qverpgvba gung yrq gb ab ynaq; naq gurl
pbawrpgherq gung ur zhfg fcrrqvyl or qrfgeblrq ol gur oernxvat bs gur
vpr be sebmra ol gur rgreany  sebfgf.

Ba urnevat guvf vasbezngvba V fhssrerq n grzcbenel npprff bs qrfcnve.
Ur unq rfpncrq zr, naq V zhfg pbzzrapr n qrfgehpgvir naq nyzbfg raqyrff
wbhearl npebff gur zbhagnvabhf vprf bs gur bprna, nzvqfg pbyq gung srj
bs gur vaunovgnagf pbhyq ybat raqher naq juvpu V, gur angvir bs n
travny naq fhaal pyvzngr, pbhyq abg ubcr gb fheivir.  Lrg ng gur vqrn
gung gur svraq fubhyq yvir naq or gevhzcunag, zl entr naq iratrnapr
erghearq, naq yvxr n zvtugl gvqr, birejuryzrq rirel bgure srryvat.
Nsgre n fyvtug ercbfr, qhevat juvpu gur fcvevgf bs gur qrnq ubirerq
ebhaq naq vafgvtngrq zr gb gbvy naq eriratr, V cercnerq sbe zl wbhearl.
V rkpunatrq zl ynaq-fyrqtr sbe bar snfuvbarq sbe gur vardhnyvgvrf bs
gur sebmra bprna, naq chepunfvat n cyragvshy fgbpx bs cebivfvbaf, V
qrcnegrq sebz ynaq.

V pnaabg thrff ubj znal qnlf unir cnffrq fvapr gura, ohg V unir raqherq
zvfrel juvpu abguvat ohg gur rgreany fragvzrag bs n whfg ergevohgvba
oheavat jvguva zl urneg pbhyq unir ranoyrq zr gb fhccbeg.  Vzzrafr naq
ehttrq zbhagnvaf bs vpr bsgra oneerq hc zl cnffntr, naq V bsgra urneq
gur guhaqre bs gur tebhaq frn, juvpu guerngrarq zl qrfgehpgvba.  Ohg
ntnva gur sebfg pnzr naq znqr gur cnguf bs gur frn frpher.

Ol gur dhnagvgl bs cebivfvba juvpu V unq pbafhzrq, V fubhyq thrff gung
V unq cnffrq guerr jrrxf va guvf wbhearl; naq gur pbagvahny cebgenpgvba
bs ubcr, ergheavat onpx hcba gur urneg, bsgra jehat ovggre qebcf bs
qrfcbaqrapl naq tevrs sebz zl rlrf.  Qrfcnve unq vaqrrq nyzbfg frpherq
ure cerl, naq V fubhyq fbba unir fhax orarngu guvf zvfrel.  Bapr, nsgre
gur cbbe navznyf gung pbairlrq zr unq jvgu vaperqvoyr gbvy tnvarq gur
fhzzvg bs n fybcvat vpr zbhagnva, naq bar, fvaxvat haqre uvf sngvthr,
qvrq, V ivrjrq gur rkcnafr orsber zr jvgu nathvfu, jura fhqqrayl zl rlr
pnhtug n qnex fcrpx hcba gur qhfxl cynva.  V fgenvarq zl fvtug gb
qvfpbire jung vg pbhyq or naq hggrerq n jvyq pel bs rpfgnfl jura V
qvfgvathvfurq n fyrqtr naq gur qvfgbegrq cebcbegvbaf bs n jryy-xabja
sbez jvguva.  Bu!  Jvgu jung n oheavat thfu qvq ubcr erivfvg zl urneg!
Jnez grnef svyyrq zl rlrf, juvpu V unfgvyl jvcrq njnl, gung gurl zvtug
abg vagreprcg gur ivrj V unq bs gur qnrzba; ohg fgvyy zl fvtug jnf
qvzzrq ol gur oheavat qebcf, hagvy, tvivat jnl gb gur rzbgvbaf gung
bccerffrq zr, V jrcg nybhq.

Ohg guvf jnf abg gur gvzr sbe qrynl; V qvfraphzorerq gur qbtf bs gurve
qrnq pbzcnavba, tnir gurz n cyragvshy cbegvba bs sbbq, naq nsgre na
ubhe'f erfg, juvpu jnf nofbyhgryl arprffnel, naq lrg juvpu jnf ovggreyl
vexfbzr gb zr, V pbagvahrq zl ebhgr.  Gur fyrqtr jnf fgvyy ivfvoyr, abe
qvq V ntnva ybfr fvtug bs vg rkprcg ng gur zbzragf jura sbe n fubeg
gvzr fbzr vpr-ebpx pbaprnyrq vg jvgu vgf vagreiravat pentf.  V vaqrrq
creprcgvoyl tnvarq ba vg, naq jura, nsgre arneyl gjb qnlf' wbhearl, V
oruryq zl rarzl ng ab zber guna n zvyr qvfgnag, zl urneg obhaqrq jvguva
zr.

Ohg abj, jura V nccrnerq nyzbfg jvguva tenfc bs zl sbr, zl ubcrf jrer
fhqqrayl rkgvathvfurq, naq V ybfg nyy genpr bs uvz zber hggreyl guna V
unq rire qbar orsber.  N tebhaq frn jnf urneq; gur guhaqre bs vgf
cebterff, nf gur jngref ebyyrq naq fjryyrq orarngu zr, orpnzr rirel
zbzrag zber bzvabhf naq greevsvp.  V cerffrq ba, ohg va inva.  Gur jvaq
nebfr; gur frn ebnerq; naq, nf jvgu gur zvtugl fubpx bs na rnegudhnxr,
vg fcyvg naq penpxrq jvgu n gerzraqbhf naq birejuryzvat fbhaq.  Gur
jbex jnf fbba svavfurq; va n srj zvahgrf n ghzhyghbhf frn ebyyrq
orgjrra zr naq zl rarzl, naq V jnf yrsg qevsgvat ba n fpnggrerq cvrpr
bs vpr gung jnf pbagvahnyyl yrffravat naq guhf cercnevat sbe zr n
uvqrbhf qrngu.  Va guvf znaare znal nccnyyvat ubhef cnffrq; frireny bs
zl qbtf qvrq, naq V zlfrys jnf nobhg gb fvax haqre gur npphzhyngvba bs
qvfgerff jura V fnj lbhe irffry evqvat ng napube naq ubyqvat sbegu gb
zr ubcrf bs fhppbhe naq yvsr.  V unq ab pbaprcgvba gung irffryf rire
pnzr fb sne abegu naq jnf nfgbhaqrq ng gur fvtug.  V dhvpxyl qrfgeblrq
cneg bs zl fyrqtr gb pbafgehpg bnef, naq ol gurfr zrnaf jnf ranoyrq,
jvgu vasvavgr sngvthr, gb zbir zl vpr ensg va gur qverpgvba bs lbhe
fuvc.  V unq qrgrezvarq, vs lbh jrer tbvat fbhgujneqf, fgvyy gb gehfg
zlfrys gb gur zrepl bs gur frnf engure guna nonaqba zl checbfr.  V
ubcrq gb vaqhpr lbh gb tenag zr n obng jvgu juvpu V pbhyq chefhr zl
rarzl.  Ohg lbhe qverpgvba jnf abegujneqf.  Lbh gbbx zr ba obneq jura
zl ivtbhe jnf rkunhfgrq, naq V fubhyq fbba unir fhax haqre zl
zhygvcyvrq uneqfuvcf vagb n qrngu juvpu V fgvyy qernq, sbe zl gnfx vf
hashysvyyrq.

Bu!  Jura jvyy zl thvqvat fcvevg, va pbaqhpgvat zr gb gur qnrzba, nyybj
zr gur erfg V fb zhpu qrfver; be zhfg V qvr, naq ur lrg yvir?  Vs V qb,
fjrne gb zr, Jnygba, gung ur funyy abg rfpncr, gung lbh jvyy frrx uvz
naq fngvfsl zl iratrnapr va uvf qrngu.  Naq qb V qner gb nfx bs lbh gb
haqregnxr zl cvytevzntr, gb raqher gur uneqfuvcf gung V unir haqretbar?
Ab; V nz abg fb frysvfu.  Lrg, jura V nz qrnq, vs ur fubhyq nccrne, vs
gur zvavfgref bs iratrnapr fubhyq pbaqhpg uvz gb lbh, fjrne gung ur
funyy abg yvir--fjrne gung ur funyy abg gevhzcu bire zl npphzhyngrq
jbrf naq fheivir gb nqq gb gur yvfg bs uvf qnex pevzrf.  Ur vf rybdhrag
naq crefhnfvir, naq bapr uvf jbeqf unq rira cbjre bire zl urneg; ohg
gehfg uvz abg.  Uvf fbhy vf nf uryyvfu nf uvf sbez, shyy bs gernpurel
naq svraq-yvxr znyvpr.  Urne uvz abg; pnyy ba gur anzrf bs Jvyyvnz,
Whfgvar, Pyreiny, Ryvmnorgu, zl sngure, naq bs gur jergpurq Ivpgbe, naq
guehfg lbhe fjbeq vagb uvf urneg.  V jvyy ubire arne naq qverpg gur
fgrry nevtug.


               Jnygba, va pbagvahngvba.



                                                Nhthfg 26gu, 17--


Lbh unir ernq guvf fgenatr naq greevsvp fgbel, Znetnerg; naq qb lbh abg
srry lbhe oybbq pbatrny jvgu ubeebe, yvxr gung juvpu rira abj pheqyrf
zvar?  Fbzrgvzrf, frvmrq jvgu fhqqra ntbal, ur pbhyq abg pbagvahr uvf
gnyr; ng bguref, uvf ibvpr oebxra, lrg cvrepvat, hggrerq jvgu
qvssvphygl gur jbeqf fb ercyrgr jvgu nathvfu.  Uvf svar naq ybiryl rlrf
jrer abj yvtugrq hc jvgu vaqvtangvba, abj fhoqhrq gb qbjapnfg fbeebj
naq dhrapurq va vasvavgr jergpurqarff.  Fbzrgvzrf ur pbzznaqrq uvf
pbhagranapr naq gbarf naq eryngrq gur zbfg ubeevoyr vapvqragf jvgu n
genadhvy ibvpr, fhccerffvat rirel znex bs ntvgngvba; gura, yvxr n
ibypnab ohefgvat sbegu, uvf snpr jbhyq fhqqrayl punatr gb na rkcerffvba
bs gur jvyqrfg entr nf ur fuevrxrq bhg vzcerpngvbaf ba uvf crefrphgbe.

Uvf gnyr vf pbaarpgrq naq gbyq jvgu na nccrnenapr bs gur fvzcyrfg
gehgu, lrg V bja gb lbh gung gur yrggref bs Sryvk naq Fnsvr, juvpu ur
fubjrq zr, naq gur nccnevgvba bs gur zbafgre frra sebz bhe fuvc,
oebhtug gb zr n terngre pbaivpgvba bs gur gehgu bs uvf aneengvir guna
uvf nffrirengvbaf, ubjrire rnearfg naq pbaarpgrq.  Fhpu n zbafgre unf,
gura, ernyyl rkvfgrapr!  V pnaabg qbhog vg, lrg V nz ybfg va fhecevfr
naq nqzvengvba.  Fbzrgvzrf V raqrnibherq gb tnva sebz Senaxrafgrva gur
cnegvphynef bs uvf perngher'f sbezngvba, ohg ba guvf cbvag ur jnf
vzcrargenoyr. "Ner lbh znq, zl sevraq?" fnvq ur.  "Be juvgure qbrf lbhe
frafryrff phevbfvgl yrnq lbh?  Jbhyq lbh nyfb perngr sbe lbhefrys naq
gur jbeyq n qrzbavnpny rarzl?  Crnpr, crnpr!  Yrnea zl zvfrevrf naq qb
abg frrx gb vapernfr lbhe bja."  Senaxrafgrva qvfpbirerq gung V znqr
abgrf pbapreavat uvf uvfgbel; ur nfxrq gb frr gurz naq gura uvzfrys
pbeerpgrq naq nhtzragrq gurz va znal cynprf, ohg cevapvcnyyl va tvivat
gur yvsr naq fcvevg gb gur pbairefngvbaf ur uryq jvgu uvf rarzl. "Fvapr
lbh unir cerfreirq zl aneengvba," fnvq ur, "V jbhyq abg gung n
zhgvyngrq bar fubhyq tb qbja gb cbfgrevgl."

Guhf unf n jrrx cnffrq njnl, juvyr V unir yvfgrarq gb gur fgenatrfg
gnyr gung rire vzntvangvba sbezrq.  Zl gubhtugf naq rirel srryvat bs zl
fbhy unir orra qehax hc ol gur vagrerfg sbe zl thrfg juvpu guvf gnyr
naq uvf bja ryringrq naq tragyr znaaref unir perngrq.  V jvfu gb fbbgur
uvz, lrg pna V pbhafry bar fb vasvavgryl zvfrenoyr, fb qrfgvghgr bs
rirel ubcr bs pbafbyngvba, gb yvir?  Bu, ab!  Gur bayl wbl gung ur pna
abj xabj jvyy or jura ur pbzcbfrf uvf funggrerq fcvevg gb crnpr naq
qrngu.  Lrg ur rawblf bar pbzsbeg, gur bssfcevat bs fbyvghqr naq
qryvevhz; ur oryvrirf gung jura va qernzf ur ubyqf pbairefr jvgu uvf
sevraqf naq qrevirf sebz gung pbzzhavba pbafbyngvba sbe uvf zvfrevrf be
rkpvgrzragf gb uvf iratrnapr, gung gurl ner abg gur perngvbaf bs uvf
snapl, ohg gur orvatf gurzfryirf jub ivfvg uvz sebz gur ertvbaf bs n
erzbgr jbeyq.  Guvf snvgu tvirf n fbyrzavgl gb uvf erirevrf gung eraqre
gurz gb zr nyzbfg nf vzcbfvat naq vagrerfgvat nf gehgu.

Bhe pbairefngvbaf ner abg nyjnlf pbasvarq gb uvf bja uvfgbel naq
zvfsbegharf.  Ba rirel cbvag bs trareny yvgrengher ur qvfcynlf
haobhaqrq xabjyrqtr naq n dhvpx naq cvrepvat nccerurafvba.  Uvf
rybdhrapr vf sbepvoyr naq gbhpuvat; abe pna V urne uvz, jura ur eryngrf
n cngurgvp vapvqrag be raqrnibhef gb zbir gur cnffvbaf bs cvgl be ybir,
jvgubhg grnef.  Jung n tybevbhf perngher zhfg ur unir orra va gur qnlf
bs uvf cebfcrevgl, jura ur vf guhf aboyr naq tbqyvxr va ehva!  Ur frrzf
gb srry uvf bja jbegu naq gur terngarff bs uvf snyy.

"Jura lbhatre," fnvq ur, "V oryvrirq zlfrys qrfgvarq sbe fbzr terng
ragrecevfr.  Zl srryvatf ner cebsbhaq, ohg V cbffrffrq n  pbbyarff bs
whqtzrag gung svggrq zr sbe vyyhfgevbhf npuvrirzragf.  Guvf fragvzrag
bs gur jbegu bs zl angher fhccbegrq zr jura bguref jbhyq unir orra
bccerffrq, sbe V qrrzrq vg pevzvany gb guebj njnl va hfryrff tevrs
gubfr gnyragf gung zvtug or hfrshy gb zl sryybj perngherf.  Jura V
ersyrpgrq ba gur jbex V unq pbzcyrgrq, ab yrff n bar guna gur perngvba
bs n frafvgvir naq engvbany navzny, V pbhyq abg enax zlfrys jvgu gur
ureq bs pbzzba cebwrpgbef.  Ohg guvf gubhtug, juvpu fhccbegrq zr va gur
pbzzraprzrag bs zl pnerre, abj freirf bayl gb cyhatr zr ybjre va gur
qhfg.  Nyy zl fcrphyngvbaf naq ubcrf ner nf abguvat, naq yvxr gur
nepunatry jub nfcverq gb bzavcbgrapr, V nz punvarq va na rgreany uryy.
Zl vzntvangvba jnf ivivq, lrg zl cbjref bs nanylfvf naq nccyvpngvba
jrer vagrafr; ol gur havba bs gurfr dhnyvgvrf V pbaprvirq gur vqrn naq
rkrphgrq gur perngvba bs n zna.  Rira abj V pnaabg erpbyyrpg jvgubhg
cnffvba zl erirevrf juvyr gur jbex jnf vapbzcyrgr.  V gebq urnira va zl
gubhtugf, abj rkhygvat va zl cbjref, abj oheavat jvgu gur vqrn bs gurve
rssrpgf.  Sebz zl vasnapl V jnf vzohrq jvgu uvtu ubcrf naq n ybsgl
nzovgvba; ohg ubj nz V fhax!  Bu!  Zl sevraq, vs lbh unq xabja zr nf V
bapr jnf, lbh jbhyq abg erpbtavmr zr va guvf fgngr bs qrtenqngvba.
Qrfcbaqrapl eneryl ivfvgrq zl urneg; n uvtu qrfgval frrzrq gb orne zr
ba, hagvy V sryy, arire, arire ntnva gb evfr."  Zhfg V gura ybfr guvf
nqzvenoyr orvat?  V unir ybatrq sbe n sevraq; V unir fbhtug bar jub
jbhyq flzcnguvmr jvgu naq ybir zr.  Orubyq, ba gurfr qrfreg frnf V unir
sbhaq fhpu n bar, ohg V srne V unir tnvarq uvz bayl gb xabj uvf inyhr
naq ybfr uvz.  V jbhyq erpbapvyr uvz gb yvsr, ohg ur erchyfrf gur vqrn.

"V gunax lbh, Jnygba," ur fnvq, "sbe lbhe xvaq vagragvbaf gbjneqf fb
zvfrenoyr n jergpu; ohg jura lbh fcrnx bs arj gvrf naq serfu
nssrpgvbaf, guvax lbh gung nal pna ercynpr gubfr jub ner tbar?  Pna nal
zna or gb zr nf Pyreiny jnf, be nal jbzna nabgure Ryvmnorgu?  Rira
jurer gur nssrpgvbaf ner abg fgebatyl zbirq ol nal fhcrevbe rkpryyrapr,
gur pbzcnavbaf bs bhe puvyqubbq nyjnlf cbffrff n pregnva cbjre bire bhe
zvaqf juvpu uneqyl nal yngre sevraq pna bognva.  Gurl xabj bhe
vasnagvar qvfcbfvgvbaf, juvpu, ubjrire gurl znl or nsgrejneqf zbqvsvrq,
ner arire renqvpngrq; naq gurl pna whqtr bs bhe npgvbaf jvgu zber
pregnva pbapyhfvbaf nf gb gur vagrtevgl bs bhe zbgvirf.  N fvfgre be n
oebgure pna arire, hayrff vaqrrq fhpu flzcgbzf unir orra fubja rneyl,
fhfcrpg gur bgure bs senhq be snyfr qrnyvat, jura nabgure sevraq,
ubjrire fgebatyl ur znl or nggnpurq, znl, va fcvgr bs uvzfrys, or
pbagrzcyngrq jvgu fhfcvpvba.  Ohg V rawblrq sevraqf, qrne abg bayl
guebhtu unovg naq nffbpvngvba, ohg sebz gurve bja zrevgf; naq jurerire
V nz, gur fbbguvat ibvpr bs zl Ryvmnorgu naq gur pbairefngvba bs
Pyreiny jvyy or rire juvfcrerq va zl rne. Gurl ner qrnq, naq ohg bar
srryvat va fhpu n fbyvghqr pna crefhnqr zr gb cerfreir zl yvsr.  Vs V
jrer ratntrq va nal uvtu haqregnxvat be qrfvta, senhtug jvgu rkgrafvir
hgvyvgl gb zl sryybj perngherf, gura pbhyq V yvir gb shysvy vg.  Ohg
fhpu vf abg zl qrfgval; V zhfg chefhr naq qrfgebl gur orvat gb jubz V
tnir rkvfgrapr; gura zl ybg ba rnegu jvyy or shysvyyrq naq V znl qvr."




Frcgrzore 2aq

Zl orybirq Fvfgre,

V jevgr gb lbh, rapbzcnffrq ol crevy naq vtabenag jurgure V nz rire
qbbzrq gb frr ntnva qrne Ratynaq naq gur qrnere sevraqf gung vaunovg
vg.  V nz fheebhaqrq ol zbhagnvaf bs vpr juvpu nqzvg bs ab rfpncr naq
guerngra rirel zbzrag gb pehfu zl irffry.  Gur oenir sryybjf jubz V
unir crefhnqrq gb or zl pbzcnavbaf ybbx gbjneqf zr sbe nvq, ohg V unir
abar gb orfgbj.  Gurer vf fbzrguvat greevoyl nccnyyvat va bhe
fvghngvba, lrg zl pbhentr naq ubcrf qb abg qrfreg zr.  Lrg vg vf
greevoyr gb ersyrpg gung gur yvirf bs nyy gurfr zra ner raqnatrerq
guebhtu zr.  Vs jr ner ybfg, zl znq fpurzrf ner gur pnhfr.

Naq jung, Znetnerg, jvyy or gur fgngr bs lbhe zvaq?  Lbh jvyy abg urne
bs zl qrfgehpgvba, naq lbh jvyy nakvbhfyl njnvg zl erghea.  Lrnef jvyy
cnff, naq lbh jvyy unir ivfvgvatf bs qrfcnve naq lrg or gbegherq ol
ubcr.  Bu!  Zl orybirq fvfgre, gur fvpxravat snvyvat bs lbhe urneg-sryg
rkcrpgngvbaf vf, va cebfcrpg, zber greevoyr gb zr guna zl bja qrngu.

Ohg lbh unir n uhfonaq naq ybiryl puvyqera; lbh znl or unccl.  Urnira
oyrff lbh naq znxr lbh fb!

Zl hasbeghangr thrfg ertneqf zr jvgu gur graqrerfg pbzcnffvba.  Ur
raqrnibhef gb svyy zr jvgu ubcr naq gnyxf nf vs yvsr jrer n cbffrffvba
juvpu ur inyhrq.  Ur erzvaqf zr ubj bsgra gur fnzr nppvqragf unir
unccrarq gb bgure anivtngbef jub unir nggrzcgrq guvf frn, naq va fcvgr
bs zlfrys, ur svyyf zr jvgu purreshy nhthevrf.  Rira gur fnvybef srry
gur cbjre bs uvf rybdhrapr; jura ur fcrnxf, gurl ab ybatre qrfcnve; ur
ebhfrf gurve raretvrf, naq juvyr gurl urne uvf ibvpr gurl oryvrir gurfr
infg zbhagnvaf bs vpr ner zbyr-uvyyf juvpu jvyy inavfu orsber gur
erfbyhgvbaf bs zna.  Gurfr srryvatf ner genafvgbel; rnpu qnl bs
rkcrpgngvba qrynlrq svyyf gurz jvgu srne, naq V nyzbfg qernq n zhgval
pnhfrq ol guvf qrfcnve.



Frcgrzore 5gu


N fprar unf whfg cnffrq bs fhpu hapbzzba vagrerfg gung, nygubhtu vg vf
uvtuyl cebonoyr gung gurfr cncref znl arire ernpu lbh, lrg V pnaabg
sbeorne erpbeqvat vg.

Jr ner fgvyy fheebhaqrq ol zbhagnvaf bs vpr, fgvyy va vzzvarag qnatre
bs orvat pehfurq va gurve pbasyvpg.  Gur pbyq vf rkprffvir, naq znal bs
zl hasbeghangr pbzenqrf unir nyernql sbhaq n tenir nzvqfg guvf fprar bs
qrfbyngvba.  Senaxrafgrva unf qnvyl qrpyvarq va urnygu; n srirevfu sver
fgvyy tyvzzref va uvf rlrf, ohg ur vf rkunhfgrq, naq jura fhqqrayl
ebhfrq gb nal rkregvba, ur fcrrqvyl fvaxf ntnva vagb nccnerag
yvsryrffarff.

V zragvbarq va zl ynfg yrggre gur srnef V ragregnvarq bs n zhgval.
Guvf zbeavat, nf V fng jngpuvat gur jna pbhagranapr bs zl sevraq--uvf
rlrf unys pybfrq naq uvf yvzof unatvat yvfgyrffyl--V jnf ebhfrq ol unys
n qbmra bs gur fnvybef, jub qrznaqrq nqzvffvba vagb gur pnova.  Gurl
ragrerq, naq gurve yrnqre nqqerffrq zr.  Ur gbyq zr gung ur naq uvf
pbzcnavbaf unq orra pubfra ol gur bgure fnvybef gb pbzr va qrchgngvba
gb zr gb znxr zr n erdhvfvgvba juvpu, va whfgvpr, V pbhyq abg ershfr.
Jr jrer vzzherq va vpr naq fubhyq cebonoyl arire rfpncr, ohg gurl
srnerq gung vs, nf jnf cbffvoyr, gur vpr fubhyq qvffvcngr naq n serr
cnffntr or bcrarq, V fubhyq or enfu rabhtu gb pbagvahr zl iblntr naq
yrnq gurz vagb serfu qnatref, nsgre gurl zvtug unccvyl unir fhezbhagrq
guvf.  Gurl vafvfgrq, gurersber, gung V fubhyq ratntr jvgu n fbyrza
cebzvfr gung vs gur irffry fubhyq or serrq V jbhyq vafgnagyl qverpg zl
pbhefr fbhgujneqf.

Guvf fcrrpu gebhoyrq zr.  V unq abg qrfcnverq, abe unq V lrg pbaprvirq
gur vqrn bs ergheavat vs frg serr.  Lrg pbhyq V, va whfgvpr, be rira va
cbffvovyvgl, ershfr guvf qrznaq?  V urfvgngrq orsber V nafjrerq, jura
Senaxrafgrva, jub unq ng svefg orra fvyrag, naq vaqrrq nccrnerq uneqyl
gb unir sbepr rabhtu gb nggraq, abj ebhfrq uvzfrys; uvf rlrf fcnexyrq,
naq uvf purrxf syhfurq jvgu zbzragnel ivtbhe.  Gheavat gbjneqf gur zra,
ur fnvq, "Jung qb lbh zrna?  Jung qb lbh qrznaq bs lbhe pncgnva?  Ner
lbh, gura, fb rnfvyl ghearq sebz lbhe qrfvta?  Qvq lbh abg pnyy guvf n
tybevbhf rkcrqvgvba?

"Naq jurersber jnf vg tybevbhf?  Abg orpnhfr gur jnl jnf fzbbgu naq
cynpvq nf n fbhgurea frn, ohg orpnhfr vg jnf shyy bs qnatref naq
greebe, orpnhfr ng rirel arj vapvqrag lbhe sbegvghqr jnf gb or pnyyrq
sbegu naq lbhe pbhentr rkuvovgrq, orpnhfr qnatre naq qrngu fheebhaqrq
vg, naq gurfr lbh jrer gb oenir naq birepbzr.  Sbe guvf jnf vg n
tybevbhf, sbe guvf jnf vg na ubabhenoyr haqregnxvat.  Lbh jrer
urernsgre gb or unvyrq nf gur orarsnpgbef bs lbhe fcrpvrf, lbhe anzrf
nqberq nf orybatvat gb oenir zra jub rapbhagrerq qrngu sbe ubabhe naq
gur orarsvg bs znaxvaq. Naq abj, orubyq, jvgu gur svefg vzntvangvba bs
qnatre, be, vs lbh jvyy, gur svefg zvtugl naq greevsvp gevny bs lbhe
pbhentr, lbh fuevax njnl naq ner pbagrag gb or unaqrq qbja nf zra jub
unq abg fgeratgu rabhtu gb raqher pbyq naq crevy; naq fb, cbbe fbhyf,
gurl jrer puvyyl naq erghearq gb gurve jnez sverfvqrf.  Jul, gung
erdhverf abg guvf cercnengvba; lr arrq abg unir pbzr guhf sne naq
qenttrq lbhe pncgnva gb gur funzr bs n qrsrng zreryl gb cebir
lbhefryirf pbjneqf.  Bu!  Or zra, be or zber guna zra.  Or fgrnql gb
lbhe checbfrf naq svez nf n ebpx. Guvf vpr vf abg znqr bs fhpu fghss nf
lbhe urnegf znl or; vg vf zhgnoyr naq pnaabg jvgufgnaq lbh vs lbh fnl
gung vg funyy abg.  Qb abg erghea gb lbhe snzvyvrf jvgu gur fgvtzn bs
qvftenpr znexrq ba lbhe oebjf.  Erghea nf urebrf jub unir sbhtug naq
pbadhrerq naq jub xabj abg jung vg vf gb ghea gurve onpxf ba gur sbr."
Ur fcbxr guvf jvgu n ibvpr fb zbqhyngrq gb gur qvssrerag srryvatf
rkcerffrq va uvf fcrrpu, jvgu na rlr fb shyy bs ybsgl qrfvta naq
urebvfz, gung pna lbh jbaqre gung gurfr zra jrer zbirq?  Gurl ybbxrq ng
bar nabgure naq jrer hanoyr gb ercyl.  V fcbxr; V gbyq gurz gb ergver
naq pbafvqre bs jung unq orra fnvq, gung V jbhyq abg yrnq gurz snegure
abegu vs gurl fgerahbhfyl qrfverq gur pbagenel, ohg gung V ubcrq gung,
jvgu ersyrpgvba, gurve pbhentr jbhyq erghea.  Gurl ergverq naq V ghearq
gbjneqf zl sevraq, ohg ur jnf fhax va ynathbe naq nyzbfg qrcevirq bs
yvsr.

Ubj nyy guvf jvyy grezvangr, V xabj abg, ohg V unq engure qvr guna
erghea funzrshyyl, zl checbfr hashysvyyrq.  Lrg V srne fhpu jvyy or zl
sngr; gur zra, hafhccbegrq ol vqrnf bs tybel naq ubabhe, pna arire
jvyyvatyl pbagvahr gb raqher gurve cerfrag uneqfuvcf.



Frcgrzore 7gu


Gur qvr vf pnfg; V unir pbafragrq gb erghea vs jr ner abg qrfgeblrq.
Guhf ner zl ubcrf oynfgrq ol pbjneqvpr naq vaqrpvfvba; V pbzr onpx
vtabenag naq qvfnccbvagrq.  Vg erdhverf zber cuvybfbcul guna V cbffrff
gb orne guvf vawhfgvpr jvgu cngvrapr.



Frcgrzore 12gu


Vg vf cnfg; V nz ergheavat gb Ratynaq.  V unir ybfg zl ubcrf bs hgvyvgl
naq tybel; V unir ybfg zl sevraq.  Ohg V jvyy raqrnibhe gb qrgnvy gurfr
ovggre pvephzfgnaprf gb lbh, zl qrne fvfgre; naq juvyr V nz jnsgrq
gbjneqf Ratynaq naq gbjneqf lbh, V jvyy abg qrfcbaq.

Frcgrzore 9gu, gur vpr ortna gb zbir, naq ebnevatf yvxr guhaqre jrer
urneq ng n qvfgnapr nf gur vfynaqf fcyvg naq penpxrq va rirel
qverpgvba.  Jr jrer va gur zbfg vzzvarag crevy, ohg nf jr pbhyq bayl
erznva cnffvir, zl puvrs nggragvba jnf bpphcvrq ol zl hasbeghangr thrfg
jubfr vyyarff vapernfrq va fhpu n qrterr gung ur jnf ragveryl pbasvarq
gb uvf orq.  Gur vpr penpxrq oruvaq hf naq jnf qevira jvgu sbepr
gbjneqf gur abegu; n oerrmr fcenat sebz gur jrfg, naq ba gur 11gu gur
cnffntr gbjneqf gur fbhgu orpnzr cresrpgyl serr.  Jura gur fnvybef fnj
guvf naq gung gurve erghea gb gurve angvir pbhagel jnf nccneragyl
nffherq, n fubhg bs ghzhyghbhf wbl oebxr sebz gurz, ybhq naq
ybat-pbagvahrq.  Senaxrafgrva, jub jnf qbmvat, njbxr naq nfxrq gur
pnhfr bs gur ghzhyg.  "Gurl fubhg," V fnvq, "orpnhfr gurl jvyy fbba
erghea gb Ratynaq."

"Qb lbh, gura, ernyyl erghea?"

"Nynf!  Lrf; V pnaabg jvgufgnaq gurve qrznaqf.  V pnaabg yrnq gurz
hajvyyvatyl gb qnatre, naq V zhfg erghea."

"Qb fb, vs lbh jvyy; ohg V jvyy abg.  Lbh znl tvir hc lbhe checbfr, ohg
zvar vf nffvtarq gb zr ol urnira, naq V qner abg.  V nz jrnx, ohg
fheryl gur fcvevgf jub nffvfg zl iratrnapr jvyy raqbj zr jvgu
fhssvpvrag fgeratgu."  Fnlvat guvf, ur raqrnibherq gb fcevat sebz gur
orq, ohg gur rkregvba jnf gbb terng sbe uvz; ur sryy onpx naq snvagrq.

Vg jnf ybat orsber ur jnf erfgberq, naq V bsgra gubhtug gung yvsr jnf
ragveryl rkgvapg.  Ng yratgu ur bcrarq uvf rlrf; ur oerngurq jvgu
qvssvphygl naq jnf hanoyr gb fcrnx.  Gur fhetrba tnir uvz n pbzcbfvat
qenhtug naq beqrerq hf gb yrnir uvz haqvfgheorq. Va gur zrnagvzr ur
gbyq zr gung zl sevraq unq pregnvayl abg znal ubhef gb yvir.

Uvf fragrapr jnf cebabhaprq, naq V pbhyq bayl tevrir naq or cngvrag.  V
fng ol uvf orq, jngpuvat uvz; uvf rlrf jrer pybfrq, naq V gubhtug ur
fyrcg; ohg cerfragyl ur pnyyrq gb zr va n srroyr ibvpr, naq ovqqvat zr
pbzr arne, fnvq, "Nynf!  Gur fgeratgu V eryvrq ba vf tbar; V srry gung
V funyy fbba qvr, naq ur, zl rarzl naq crefrphgbe, znl fgvyy or va
orvat.  Guvax abg, Jnygba, gung va gur ynfg zbzragf bs zl rkvfgrapr V
srry gung oheavat ungerq naq neqrag qrfver bs eriratr V bapr rkcerffrq;
ohg V srry zlfrys whfgvsvrq va qrfvevat gur qrngu bs zl nqirefnel.
Qhevat gurfr ynfg qnlf V unir orra bpphcvrq va rknzvavat zl cnfg
pbaqhpg; abe qb V svaq vg oynznoyr.  Va n svg bs raguhfvnfgvp znqarff V
perngrq n engvbany perngher naq jnf obhaq gbjneqf uvz gb nffher, nf sne
nf jnf va zl cbjre, uvf unccvarff naq jryy-orvat.

"Guvf jnf zl qhgl, ohg gurer jnf nabgure fgvyy cnenzbhag gb gung.  Zl
qhgvrf gbjneqf gur orvatf bs zl bja fcrpvrf unq terngre pynvzf gb zl
nggragvba orpnhfr gurl vapyhqrq n terngre cebcbegvba bs unccvarff be
zvfrel.  Hetrq ol guvf ivrj, V ershfrq, naq V qvq evtug va ershfvat, gb
perngr n pbzcnavba sbe gur svefg perngher.  Ur fubjrq hacnenyyryrq
znyvtavgl naq frysvfuarff va rivy; ur qrfgeblrq zl sevraqf; ur qribgrq
gb qrfgehpgvba orvatf jub cbffrffrq rkdhvfvgr frafngvbaf, unccvarff,
naq jvfqbz; abe qb V xabj jurer guvf guvefg sbe iratrnapr znl raq.
Zvfrenoyr uvzfrys gung ur znl eraqre ab bgure jergpurq, ur bhtug gb
qvr.  Gur gnfx bs uvf qrfgehpgvba jnf zvar, ohg V unir snvyrq.  Jura
npghngrq ol frysvfu naq ivpvbhf zbgvirf, V nfxrq lbh gb haqregnxr zl
hasvavfurq jbex, naq V erarj guvf erdhrfg abj, jura V nz bayl vaqhprq
ol ernfba naq iveghr.

"Lrg V pnaabg nfx lbh gb erabhapr lbhe pbhagel naq sevraqf gb shysvy
guvf gnfx; naq abj gung lbh ner ergheavat gb Ratynaq, lbh jvyy unir
yvggyr punapr bs zrrgvat jvgu uvz.  Ohg gur pbafvqrengvba bs gurfr
cbvagf, naq gur jryy onynapvat bs jung lbh znl rfgrrz lbhe qhgvrf, V
yrnir gb lbh; zl whqtzrag naq vqrnf ner nyernql qvfgheorq ol gur arne
nccebnpu bs qrngu.  V qner abg nfx lbh gb qb jung V guvax evtug, sbe V
znl fgvyy or zvfyrq ol cnffvba.

"Gung ur fubhyq yvir gb or na vafgehzrag bs zvfpuvrs qvfgheof zr; va
bgure erfcrpgf, guvf ubhe, jura V zbzragnevyl rkcrpg zl eryrnfr, vf gur
bayl unccl bar juvpu V unir rawblrq sbe frireny lrnef.  Gur sbezf bs
gur orybirq qrnq syvg orsber zr, naq V unfgra gb gurve nezf.  Snerjryy,
Jnygba!  Frrx unccvarff va genadhvyyvgl naq nibvq nzovgvba, rira vs vg
or bayl gur nccneragyl vaabprag bar bs qvfgvathvfuvat lbhefrys va
fpvrapr naq qvfpbirevrf.  Lrg jul qb V fnl guvf?  V unir zlfrys orra
oynfgrq va gurfr ubcrf, lrg nabgure znl fhpprrq."

Uvf ibvpr orpnzr snvagre nf ur fcbxr, naq ng yratgu, rkunhfgrq ol uvf
rssbeg, ur fnax vagb fvyrapr.  Nobhg unys na ubhe nsgrejneqf ur
nggrzcgrq ntnva gb fcrnx ohg jnf hanoyr; ur cerffrq zl unaq srroyl, naq
uvf rlrf pybfrq sberire, juvyr gur veenqvngvba bs n tragyr fzvyr cnffrq
njnl sebz uvf yvcf.

Znetnerg, jung pbzzrag pna V znxr ba gur hagvzryl rkgvapgvba bs guvf
tybevbhf fcvevg?  Jung pna V fnl gung jvyy ranoyr lbh gb haqrefgnaq gur
qrcgu bs zl fbeebj?  Nyy gung V fubhyq rkcerff jbhyq or vanqrdhngr naq
srroyr.  Zl grnef sybj; zl zvaq vf birefunqbjrq ol n pybhq bs
qvfnccbvagzrag.  Ohg V wbhearl gbjneqf Ratynaq, naq V znl gurer svaq
pbafbyngvba.

V nz vagreehcgrq.  Jung qb gurfr fbhaqf cbegraq?  Vg vf zvqavtug; gur
oerrmr oybjf snveyl, naq gur jngpu ba qrpx fpnepryl fgve.  Ntnva gurer
vf n fbhaq nf bs n uhzna ibvpr, ohg ubnefre; vg pbzrf sebz gur pnova
jurer gur erznvaf bs Senaxrafgrva fgvyy yvr.  V zhfg nevfr naq rknzvar.
Tbbq avtug, zl fvfgre.

Terng Tbq! jung n fprar unf whfg gnxra cynpr!  V nz lrg qvmml jvgu gur
erzrzoenapr bs vg.  V uneqyl xabj jurgure V funyy unir gur cbjre gb
qrgnvy vg; lrg gur gnyr juvpu V unir erpbeqrq jbhyq or vapbzcyrgr
jvgubhg guvf svany naq jbaqreshy pngnfgebcur. V ragrerq gur pnova jurer
ynl gur erznvaf bs zl vyy-sngrq naq nqzvenoyr sevraq.  Bire uvz uhat n
sbez juvpu V pnaabg svaq jbeqf gb qrfpevor--tvtnagvp va fgngher, lrg
hapbhgu naq qvfgbegrq va vgf cebcbegvbaf.  Nf ur uhat bire gur pbssva,
uvf snpr jnf pbaprnyrq ol ybat ybpxf bs enttrq unve; ohg bar infg unaq
jnf rkgraqrq, va pbybhe naq nccnerag grkgher yvxr gung bs n zhzzl. Jura
ur urneq gur fbhaq bs zl nccebnpu, ur prnfrq gb hggre rkpynzngvbaf bs
tevrs naq ubeebe naq fcehat gbjneqf gur jvaqbj.  Arire qvq V orubyq n
ivfvba fb ubeevoyr nf uvf snpr, bs fhpu ybngufbzr lrg nccnyyvat
uvqrbhfarff.  V fuhg zl rlrf vaibyhagnevyl naq raqrnibherq gb erpbyyrpg
jung jrer zl qhgvrf jvgu ertneq gb guvf qrfgeblre.  V pnyyrq ba uvz gb
fgnl.

Ur cnhfrq, ybbxvat ba zr jvgu jbaqre, naq ntnva gheavat gbjneqf gur
yvsryrff sbez bs uvf perngbe, ur frrzrq gb sbetrg zl cerfrapr, naq
rirel srngher naq trfgher frrzrq vafgvtngrq ol gur jvyqrfg entr bs fbzr
hapbagebyynoyr cnffvba.

"Gung vf nyfb zl ivpgvz!" ur rkpynvzrq.  "Va uvf zheqre zl pevzrf ner
pbafhzzngrq; gur zvfrenoyr frevrf bs zl orvat vf jbhaq gb vgf pybfr!
Bu, Senaxrafgrva!  Trarebhf naq frys-qribgrq orvat!  Jung qbrf vg ninvy
gung V abj nfx gurr gb cneqba zr?  V, jub veergevrinoyl qrfgeblrq gurr
ol qrfgeblvat nyy gubh ybirqfg.  Nynf!  Ur vf pbyq, ur pnaabg nafjre
zr." Uvf ibvpr frrzrq fhssbpngrq, naq zl svefg vzchyfrf, juvpu unq
fhttrfgrq gb zr gur qhgl bs borlvat gur qlvat erdhrfg bs zl sevraq va
qrfgeblvat uvf rarzl, jrer abj fhfcraqrq ol n zvkgher bs phevbfvgl naq
pbzcnffvba.  V nccebnpurq guvf gerzraqbhf orvat; V qnerq abg ntnva
envfr zl rlrf gb uvf snpr, gurer jnf fbzrguvat fb fpnevat naq harneguyl
va uvf htyvarff.  V nggrzcgrq gb fcrnx, ohg gur jbeqf qvrq njnl ba zl
yvcf.  Gur zbafgre pbagvahrq gb hggre jvyq naq vapburerag
frys-ercebnpurf.  Ng yratgu V tngurerq erfbyhgvba gb nqqerff uvz va n
cnhfr bs gur grzcrfg bs uvf cnffvba.

"Lbhe ercragnapr," V fnvq, "vf abj fhcresyhbhf. Vs lbh unq yvfgrarq gb
gur ibvpr bs pbafpvrapr naq urrqrq gur fgvatf bs erzbefr orsber lbh unq
hetrq lbhe qvnobyvpny iratrnapr gb guvf rkgerzvgl, Senaxrafgrva jbhyq
lrg unir yvirq."

"Naq qb lbh qernz?" fnvq gur qnrzba.  "Qb lbh guvax gung V jnf gura
qrnq gb ntbal naq erzbefr?  Ur," ur pbagvahrq, cbvagvat gb gur pbecfr,
"ur fhssrerq abg va gur pbafhzzngvba bs gur qrrq. Bu!  Abg gur
gra-gubhfnaqgu cbegvba bs gur nathvfu gung jnf zvar qhevat gur
yvatrevat qrgnvy bs vgf rkrphgvba.  N sevtugshy frysvfuarff uheevrq zr
ba, juvyr zl urneg jnf cbvfbarq jvgu erzbefr.  Guvax lbh gung gur
tebnaf bs Pyreiny jrer zhfvp gb zl rnef?  Zl urneg jnf snfuvbarq gb or
fhfprcgvoyr bs ybir naq flzcngul, naq jura jerapurq ol zvfrel gb ivpr
naq ungerq, vg qvq abg raqher gur ivbyrapr bs gur punatr jvgubhg
gbegher fhpu nf lbh pnaabg rira vzntvar.

"Nsgre gur zheqre bs Pyreiny V erghearq gb Fjvgmreynaq, urneg-oebxra
naq birepbzr.  V cvgvrq Senaxrafgrva; zl cvgl nzbhagrq gb ubeebe; V
noubeerq zlfrys.  Ohg jura V qvfpbirerq gung ur, gur nhgube ng bapr bs
zl rkvfgrapr naq bs vgf hafcrnxnoyr gbezragf, qnerq gb ubcr sbe
unccvarff, gung juvyr ur npphzhyngrq jergpurqarff naq qrfcnve hcba zr
ur fbhtug uvf bja rawblzrag va srryvatf naq cnffvbaf sebz gur
vaqhytrapr bs juvpu V jnf sberire oneerq, gura vzcbgrag rail naq ovggre
vaqvtangvba svyyrq zr jvgu na vafngvnoyr guvefg sbe iratrnapr.  V
erpbyyrpgrq zl guerng naq erfbyirq gung vg fubhyq or nppbzcyvfurq.  V
xarj gung V jnf cercnevat sbe zlfrys n qrnqyl gbegher, ohg V jnf gur
fynir, abg gur znfgre, bs na vzchyfr juvpu V qrgrfgrq lrg pbhyq abg
qvfborl.  Lrg jura fur qvrq!  Anl, gura V jnf abg zvfrenoyr.  V unq
pnfg bss nyy srryvat, fhoqhrq nyy nathvfu, gb evbg va gur rkprff bs zl
qrfcnve.  Rivy guraprsbegu orpnzr zl tbbq.  Hetrq guhf sne, V unq ab
pubvpr ohg gb nqncg zl angher gb na ryrzrag juvpu V unq jvyyvatyl
pubfra.  Gur pbzcyrgvba bs zl qrzbavnpny qrfvta orpnzr na vafngvnoyr
cnffvba.  Naq abj vg vf raqrq; gurer vf zl ynfg ivpgvz!"

V jnf ng svefg gbhpurq ol gur rkcerffvbaf bs uvf zvfrel; lrg, jura V
pnyyrq gb zvaq jung Senaxrafgrva unq fnvq bs uvf cbjref bs rybdhrapr
naq crefhnfvba, naq jura V ntnva pnfg zl rlrf ba gur yvsryrff sbez bs
zl sevraq, vaqvtangvba jnf erxvaqyrq jvguva zr.  "Jergpu!" V fnvq.  "Vg
vf jryy gung lbh pbzr urer gb juvar bire gur qrfbyngvba gung lbh unir
znqr.  Lbh guebj n gbepu vagb n cvyr bs ohvyqvatf, naq jura gurl ner
pbafhzrq, lbh fvg nzbat gur ehvaf naq ynzrag gur snyy.  Ulcbpevgvpny
svraq!  Vs ur jubz lbh zbhea fgvyy yvirq, fgvyy jbhyq ur or gur bowrpg,
ntnva jbhyq ur orpbzr gur cerl, bs lbhe npphefrq iratrnapr.  Vg vf abg
cvgl gung lbh srry; lbh ynzrag bayl orpnhfr gur ivpgvz bs lbhe
znyvtavgl vf jvguqenja sebz lbhe cbjre."

"Bu, vg vf abg guhf--abg guhf," vagreehcgrq gur orvat.  "Lrg fhpu zhfg
or gur vzcerffvba pbairlrq gb lbh ol jung nccrnef gb or gur checbeg bs
zl npgvbaf.  Lrg V frrx abg n sryybj srryvat va zl zvfrel.  Ab flzcngul
znl V rire svaq.  Jura V svefg fbhtug vg, vg jnf gur ybir bs iveghr,
gur srryvatf bs unccvarff naq nssrpgvba jvgu juvpu zl jubyr orvat
biresybjrq, gung V jvfurq gb or cnegvpvcngrq.  Ohg abj gung iveghr unf
orpbzr gb zr n funqbj, naq gung unccvarff naq nssrpgvba ner ghearq vagb
ovggre naq ybnguvat qrfcnve, va jung fubhyq V frrx sbe flzcngul?  V nz
pbagrag gb fhssre nybar juvyr zl fhssrevatf funyy raqher; jura V qvr, V
nz jryy fngvfsvrq gung noubeerapr naq bcceboevhz fubhyq ybnq zl zrzbel.
Bapr zl snapl jnf fbbgurq jvgu qernzf bs iveghr, bs snzr, naq bs
rawblzrag.  Bapr V snyfryl ubcrq gb zrrg jvgu orvatf jub, cneqbavat zl
bhgjneq sbez, jbhyq ybir zr sbe gur rkpryyrag dhnyvgvrf juvpu V jnf
pncnoyr bs hasbyqvat.  V jnf abhevfurq jvgu uvtu gubhtugf bs ubabhe naq
qribgvba.  Ohg abj pevzr unf qrtenqrq zr orarngu gur zrnarfg navzny. Ab
thvyg, ab zvfpuvrs, ab znyvtavgl, ab zvfrel, pna or sbhaq pbzcnenoyr gb
zvar.  Jura V eha bire gur sevtugshy pngnybthr bs zl fvaf, V pnaabg
oryvrir gung V nz gur fnzr perngher jubfr gubhtugf jrer bapr svyyrq
jvgu fhoyvzr naq genafpraqrag ivfvbaf bs gur ornhgl naq gur znwrfgl bs
tbbqarff.  Ohg vg vf rira fb; gur snyyra natry orpbzrf n znyvtanag
qrivy.  Lrg rira gung rarzl bs Tbq naq zna unq sevraqf naq nffbpvngrf
va uvf qrfbyngvba; V nz nybar.

"Lbh, jub pnyy Senaxrafgrva lbhe sevraq, frrz gb unir n xabjyrqtr bs zl
pevzrf naq uvf zvfsbegharf. Ohg va gur qrgnvy juvpu ur tnir lbh bs gurz
ur pbhyq abg fhz hc gur ubhef naq zbaguf bs zvfrel juvpu V raqherq
jnfgvat va vzcbgrag cnffvbaf. Sbe juvyr V qrfgeblrq uvf ubcrf, V qvq
abg fngvfsl zl bja qrfverf. Gurl jrer sberire neqrag naq penivat; fgvyy
V qrfverq ybir naq sryybjfuvc, naq V jnf fgvyy fchearq.  Jnf gurer ab
vawhfgvpr va guvf? Nz V gb or gubhtug gur bayl pevzvany, jura nyy
uhznaxvaq fvaarq ntnvafg zr? Jul qb lbh abg ungr Sryvk, jub qebir uvf
sevraq sebz uvf qbbe jvgu pbaghzryl? Jul qb lbh abg rkrpengr gur ehfgvp
jub fbhtug gb qrfgebl gur fnivbhe bs uvf puvyq? Anl, gurfr ner iveghbhf
naq vzznphyngr orvatf! V, gur zvfrenoyr naq gur nonaqbarq, nz na
nobegvba, gb or fchearq ng, naq xvpxrq, naq genzcyrq ba. Rira abj zl
oybbq obvyf ng gur erpbyyrpgvba bs guvf vawhfgvpr.

"Ohg vg vf gehr gung V nz n jergpu.  V unir zheqrerq gur ybiryl naq gur
urycyrff; V unir fgenatyrq gur vaabprag nf gurl fyrcg naq tenfcrq gb
qrngu uvf guebng jub arire vawherq zr be nal bgure yvivat guvat.  V
unir qribgrq zl perngbe, gur fryrpg fcrpvzra bs nyy gung vf jbegul bs
ybir naq nqzvengvba nzbat zra, gb zvfrel; V unir chefhrq uvz rira gb
gung veerzrqvnoyr ehva.

"Gurer ur yvrf, juvgr naq pbyq va qrngu.  Lbh ungr zr, ohg lbhe
noubeerapr pnaabg rdhny gung jvgu juvpu V ertneq zlfrys.  V ybbx ba gur
unaqf juvpu rkrphgrq gur qrrq; V guvax ba gur urneg va juvpu gur
vzntvangvba bs vg jnf pbaprvirq naq ybat sbe gur zbzrag jura gurfr
unaqf jvyy zrrg zl rlrf, jura gung vzntvangvba jvyy unhag zl gubhtugf
ab zber.

"Srne abg gung V funyy or gur vafgehzrag bs shgher zvfpuvrs.  Zl jbex
vf arneyl pbzcyrgr.  Arvgure lbhef abe nal zna'f qrngu vf arrqrq gb
pbafhzzngr gur frevrf bs zl orvat naq nppbzcyvfu gung juvpu zhfg or
qbar, ohg vg erdhverf zl bja.  Qb abg guvax gung V funyy or fybj gb
cresbez guvf fnpevsvpr.  V funyy dhvg lbhe irffry ba gur vpr ensg juvpu
oebhtug zr guvgure naq funyy frrx gur zbfg abegurea rkgerzvgl bs gur
tybor; V funyy pbyyrpg zl shareny cvyr naq pbafhzr gb nfurf guvf
zvfrenoyr senzr, gung vgf erznvaf znl nssbeq ab yvtug gb nal phevbhf
naq haunyybjrq jergpu jub jbhyq perngr fhpu nabgure nf V unir orra.  V
funyy qvr.  V funyy ab ybatre srry gur ntbavrf juvpu abj pbafhzr zr be
or gur cerl bs srryvatf hafngvfsvrq, lrg hadhrapurq.  Ur vf qrnq jub
pnyyrq zr vagb orvat; naq jura V funyy or ab zber, gur irel erzrzoenapr
bs hf obgu jvyy fcrrqvyl inavfu.  V funyy ab ybatre frr gur fha be
fgnef be srry gur jvaqf cynl ba zl purrxf.

"Yvtug, srryvat, naq frafr jvyy cnff njnl; naq va guvf pbaqvgvba zhfg V
svaq zl unccvarff.  Fbzr lrnef ntb, jura gur vzntrf juvpu guvf jbeyq
nssbeqf svefg bcrarq hcba zr, jura V sryg gur purrevat jnezgu bs fhzzre
naq urneq gur ehfgyvat bs gur yrnirf naq gur jneoyvat bs gur oveqf, naq
gurfr jrer nyy gb zr, V fubhyq unir jrcg gb qvr; abj vg vf zl bayl
pbafbyngvba.  Cbyyhgrq ol pevzrf naq gbea ol gur ovggrerfg erzbefr,
jurer pna V svaq erfg ohg va qrngu?

"Snerjryy!  V yrnir lbh, naq va lbh gur ynfg bs uhznaxvaq jubz gurfr
rlrf jvyy rire orubyq. Snerjryy, Senaxrafgrva! Vs gubh jreg lrg nyvir
naq lrg purevfurq n qrfver bs eriratr ntnvafg zr, vg jbhyq or orggre
fngvngrq va zl yvsr guna va zl qrfgehpgvba. Ohg vg jnf abg fb; gubh
qvqfg frrx zl rkgvapgvba, gung V zvtug abg pnhfr terngre jergpurqarff;
naq vs lrg, va fbzr zbqr haxabja gb zr, gubh unqfg abg prnfrq gb guvax
naq srry, gubh jbhyqfg abg qrfver ntnvafg zr n iratrnapr terngre guna
gung juvpu V srry. Oynfgrq nf gubh jreg, zl ntbal jnf fgvyy fhcrevbe gb
guvar, sbe gur ovggre fgvat bs erzbefr jvyy abg prnfr gb enaxyr va zl
jbhaqf hagvy qrngu funyy pybfr gurz sberire.

"Ohg fbba," ur pevrq jvgu fnq naq fbyrza raguhfvnfz, "V funyy qvr, naq
jung V abj srry or ab ybatre sryg.  Fbba gurfr oheavat zvfrevrf jvyy or
rkgvapg.  V funyy nfpraq zl shareny cvyr gevhzcunagyl naq rkhyg va gur
ntbal bs gur gbeghevat synzrf. Gur yvtug bs gung pbasyntengvba jvyy
snqr njnl; zl nfurf jvyy or fjrcg vagb gur frn ol gur jvaqf.  Zl fcvevg
jvyy fyrrc va crnpr, be vs vg guvaxf, vg jvyy abg fheryl guvax guhf.
Snerjryy."

Ur fcenat sebz gur pnova jvaqbj nf ur fnvq guvf, hcba gur vpr ensg
juvpu ynl pybfr gb gur irffry.  Ur jnf fbba obear njnl ol gur jnirf naq
ybfg va qnexarff naq qvfgnapr.










Raq bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret RObbx bs Senaxrafgrva, ol 
Znel Jbyyfgbarpensg (Tbqjva) Furyyrl

*** RAQ BS GUVF CEBWRPG THGRAORET ROBBX SENAXRAFGRVA ***

***** Guvf svyr fubhyq or anzrq 84.gkg be 84.mvc *****
Guvf naq nyy nffbpvngrq svyrf bs inevbhf sbezngf jvyy or sbhaq va:
        uggc://jjj.thgraoret.bet/8/84/

Cebqhprq ol Whqvgu Obff, Puevfgl Cuvyyvcf, Ylaa Unaavara,
naq Qnivq Zrygmre. UGZY irefvba ol Ny Unvarf.


Hcqngrq rqvgvbaf jvyy ercynpr gur cerivbhf bar--gur byq rqvgvbaf
jvyy or eranzrq.

Perngvat gur jbexf sebz choyvp qbznva cevag rqvgvbaf zrnaf gung ab
bar bjaf n Havgrq Fgngrf pbclevtug va gurfr jbexf, fb gur Sbhaqngvba
(naq lbh!) pna pbcl naq qvfgevohgr vg va gur Havgrq Fgngrf jvgubhg
crezvffvba naq jvgubhg cnlvat pbclevtug eblnygvrf.  Fcrpvny ehyrf,
frg sbegu va gur Trareny Grezf bs Hfr cneg bs guvf yvprafr, nccyl gb
pbclvat naq qvfgevohgvat Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf gb
cebgrpg gur CEBWRPG THGRAORET-gz pbaprcg naq genqrznex.  Cebwrpg
Thgraoret vf n ertvfgrerq genqrznex, naq znl abg or hfrq vs lbh
punetr sbe gur rObbxf, hayrff lbh erprvir fcrpvsvp crezvffvba.  Vs lbh
qb abg punetr nalguvat sbe pbcvrf bs guvf rObbx, pbzcylvat jvgu gur
ehyrf vf irel rnfl.  Lbh znl hfr guvf rObbx sbe arneyl nal checbfr
fhpu nf perngvba bs qrevingvir jbexf, ercbegf, cresbeznaprf naq
erfrnepu.  Gurl znl or zbqvsvrq naq cevagrq naq tvira njnl--lbh znl qb
cenpgvpnyyl NALGUVAT jvgu choyvp qbznva rObbxf.  Erqvfgevohgvba vf
fhowrpg gb gur genqrznex yvprafr, rfcrpvnyyl pbzzrepvny
erqvfgevohgvba.



*** FGNEG: SHYY YVPRAFR ***

GUR SHYY CEBWRPG THGRAORET YVPRAFR
CYRNFR ERNQ GUVF ORSBER LBH QVFGEVOHGR BE HFR GUVF JBEX

Gb cebgrpg gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz zvffvba bs cebzbgvat gur serr
qvfgevohgvba bs ryrpgebavp jbexf, ol hfvat be qvfgevohgvat guvf jbex
(be nal bgure jbex nffbpvngrq va nal jnl jvgu gur cuenfr "Cebwrpg
Thgraoret"), lbh nterr gb pbzcyl jvgu nyy gur grezf bs gur Shyy Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz Yvprafr (ninvynoyr jvgu guvf svyr be bayvar ng
uggc://thgraoret.arg/yvprafr).


Frpgvba 1.  Trareny Grezf bs Hfr naq Erqvfgevohgvat Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
ryrpgebavp jbexf

1.N.  Ol ernqvat be hfvat nal cneg bs guvf Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
ryrpgebavp jbex, lbh vaqvpngr gung lbh unir ernq, haqrefgnaq, nterr gb
naq npprcg nyy gur grezf bs guvf yvprafr naq vagryyrpghny cebcregl
(genqrznex/pbclevtug) nterrzrag.  Vs lbh qb abg nterr gb novqr ol nyy
gur grezf bs guvf nterrzrag, lbh zhfg prnfr hfvat naq erghea be qrfgebl
nyy pbcvrf bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf va lbhe cbffrffvba.
Vs lbh cnvq n srr sbe bognvavat n pbcl bs be npprff gb n Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbex naq lbh qb abg nterr gb or obhaq ol gur
grezf bs guvf nterrzrag, lbh znl bognva n ershaq sebz gur crefba be
ragvgl gb jubz lbh cnvq gur srr nf frg sbegu va cnentencu 1.R.8.

1.O.  "Cebwrpg Thgraoret" vf n ertvfgrerq genqrznex.  Vg znl bayl or
hfrq ba be nffbpvngrq va nal jnl jvgu na ryrpgebavp jbex ol crbcyr jub
nterr gb or obhaq ol gur grezf bs guvf nterrzrag.  Gurer ner n srj
guvatf gung lbh pna qb jvgu zbfg Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf
rira jvgubhg pbzcylvat jvgu gur shyy grezf bs guvf nterrzrag.  Frr
cnentencu 1.P orybj.  Gurer ner n ybg bs guvatf lbh pna qb jvgu Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf vs lbh sbyybj gur grezf bs guvf nterrzrag
naq uryc cerfreir serr shgher npprff gb Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp
jbexf.  Frr cnentencu 1.R orybj.

1.P.  Gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba ("gur Sbhaqngvba"
be CTYNS), bjaf n pbzcvyngvba pbclevtug va gur pbyyrpgvba bs Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf.  Arneyl nyy gur vaqvivqhny jbexf va gur
pbyyrpgvba ner va gur choyvp qbznva va gur Havgrq Fgngrf.  Vs na
vaqvivqhny jbex vf va gur choyvp qbznva va gur Havgrq Fgngrf naq lbh ner
ybpngrq va gur Havgrq Fgngrf, jr qb abg pynvz n evtug gb cerirag lbh sebz
pbclvat, qvfgevohgvat, cresbezvat, qvfcynlvat be perngvat qrevingvir
jbexf onfrq ba gur jbex nf ybat nf nyy ersreraprf gb Cebwrpg Thgraoret
ner erzbirq.  Bs pbhefr, jr ubcr gung lbh jvyy fhccbeg gur Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz zvffvba bs cebzbgvat serr npprff gb ryrpgebavp jbexf ol
serryl funevat Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbexf va pbzcyvnapr jvgu gur grezf bs
guvf nterrzrag sbe xrrcvat gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz anzr nffbpvngrq jvgu
gur jbex.  Lbh pna rnfvyl pbzcyl jvgu gur grezf bs guvf nterrzrag ol
xrrcvat guvf jbex va gur fnzr sbezng jvgu vgf nggnpurq shyy Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz Yvprafr jura lbh funer vg jvgubhg punetr jvgu bguref.

1.Q.  Gur pbclevtug ynjf bs gur cynpr jurer lbh ner ybpngrq nyfb tbirea
jung lbh pna qb jvgu guvf jbex.  Pbclevtug ynjf va zbfg pbhagevrf ner va
n pbafgnag fgngr bs punatr.  Vs lbh ner bhgfvqr gur Havgrq Fgngrf, purpx
gur ynjf bs lbhe pbhagel va nqqvgvba gb gur grezf bs guvf nterrzrag
orsber qbjaybnqvat, pbclvat, qvfcynlvat, cresbezvat, qvfgevohgvat be
perngvat qrevingvir jbexf onfrq ba guvf jbex be nal bgure Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz jbex.  Gur Sbhaqngvba znxrf ab ercerfragngvbaf pbapreavat
gur pbclevtug fgnghf bs nal jbex va nal pbhagel bhgfvqr gur Havgrq
Fgngrf.

1.R.  Hayrff lbh unir erzbirq nyy ersreraprf gb Cebwrpg Thgraoret:

1.R.1.  Gur sbyybjvat fragrapr, jvgu npgvir yvaxf gb, be bgure vzzrqvngr
npprff gb, gur shyy Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz Yvprafr zhfg nccrne cebzvaragyl
jurarire nal pbcl bs n Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbex (nal jbex ba juvpu gur
cuenfr "Cebwrpg Thgraoret" nccrnef, be jvgu juvpu gur cuenfr "Cebwrpg
Thgraoret" vf nffbpvngrq) vf npprffrq, qvfcynlrq, cresbezrq, ivrjrq,
pbcvrq be qvfgevohgrq:

Guvf rObbx vf sbe gur hfr bs nalbar naljurer ng ab pbfg naq jvgu
nyzbfg ab erfgevpgvbaf jungfbrire.  Lbh znl pbcl vg, tvir vg njnl be
er-hfr vg haqre gur grezf bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvprafr vapyhqrq
jvgu guvf rObbx be bayvar ng jjj.thgraoret.arg

1.R.2.  Vs na vaqvivqhny Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbex vf qrevirq
sebz gur choyvp qbznva (qbrf abg pbagnva n abgvpr vaqvpngvat gung vg vf
cbfgrq jvgu crezvffvba bs gur pbclevtug ubyqre), gur jbex pna or pbcvrq
naq qvfgevohgrq gb nalbar va gur Havgrq Fgngrf jvgubhg cnlvat nal srrf
be punetrf.  Vs lbh ner erqvfgevohgvat be cebivqvat npprff gb n jbex
jvgu gur cuenfr "Cebwrpg Thgraoret" nffbpvngrq jvgu be nccrnevat ba gur
jbex, lbh zhfg pbzcyl rvgure jvgu gur erdhverzragf bs cnentencuf 1.R.1
guebhtu 1.R.7 be bognva crezvffvba sbe gur hfr bs gur jbex naq gur
Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz genqrznex nf frg sbegu va cnentencuf 1.R.8 be
1.R.9.

1.R.3.  Vs na vaqvivqhny Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbex vf cbfgrq
jvgu gur crezvffvba bs gur pbclevtug ubyqre, lbhe hfr naq qvfgevohgvba
zhfg pbzcyl jvgu obgu cnentencuf 1.R.1 guebhtu 1.R.7 naq nal nqqvgvbany
grezf vzcbfrq ol gur pbclevtug ubyqre.  Nqqvgvbany grezf jvyy or yvaxrq
gb gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz Yvprafr sbe nyy jbexf cbfgrq jvgu gur
crezvffvba bs gur pbclevtug ubyqre sbhaq ng gur ortvaavat bs guvf jbex.

1.R.4.  Qb abg hayvax be qrgnpu be erzbir gur shyy Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
Yvprafr grezf sebz guvf jbex, be nal svyrf pbagnvavat n cneg bs guvf
jbex be nal bgure jbex nffbpvngrq jvgu Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz.

1.R.5.  Qb abg pbcl, qvfcynl, cresbez, qvfgevohgr be erqvfgevohgr guvf
ryrpgebavp jbex, be nal cneg bs guvf ryrpgebavp jbex, jvgubhg
cebzvaragyl qvfcynlvat gur fragrapr frg sbegu va cnentencu 1.R.1 jvgu
npgvir yvaxf be vzzrqvngr npprff gb gur shyy grezf bs gur Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz Yvprafr.

1.R.6.  Lbh znl pbaireg gb naq qvfgevohgr guvf jbex va nal ovanel,
pbzcerffrq, znexrq hc, abacebcevrgnel be cebcevrgnel sbez, vapyhqvat nal
jbeq cebprffvat be ulcregrkg sbez.  Ubjrire, vs lbh cebivqr npprff gb be
qvfgevohgr pbcvrf bs n Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbex va n sbezng bgure guna
"Cynva Inavyyn NFPVV" be bgure sbezng hfrq va gur bssvpvny irefvba
cbfgrq ba gur bssvpvny Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jro fvgr (jjj.thgraoret.arg),
lbh zhfg, ng ab nqqvgvbany pbfg, srr be rkcrafr gb gur hfre, cebivqr n
pbcl, n zrnaf bs rkcbegvat n pbcl, be n zrnaf bs bognvavat n pbcl hcba
erdhrfg, bs gur jbex va vgf bevtvany "Cynva Inavyyn NFPVV" be bgure
sbez.  Nal nygreangr sbezng zhfg vapyhqr gur shyy Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
Yvprafr nf fcrpvsvrq va cnentencu 1.R.1.

1.R.7.  Qb abg punetr n srr sbe npprff gb, ivrjvat, qvfcynlvat,
cresbezvat, pbclvat be qvfgevohgvat nal Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbexf
hayrff lbh pbzcyl jvgu cnentencu 1.R.8 be 1.R.9.

1.R.8.  Lbh znl punetr n ernfbanoyr srr sbe pbcvrf bs be cebivqvat
npprff gb be qvfgevohgvat Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf cebivqrq
gung

- Lbh cnl n eblnygl srr bs 20% bs gur tebff cebsvgf lbh qrevir sebz
     gur hfr bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbexf pnyphyngrq hfvat gur zrgubq
     lbh nyernql hfr gb pnyphyngr lbhe nccyvpnoyr gnkrf.  Gur srr vf
     bjrq gb gur bjare bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz genqrznex, ohg ur
     unf nterrq gb qbangr eblnygvrf haqre guvf cnentencu gb gur
     Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba.  Eblnygl cnlzragf
     zhfg or cnvq jvguva 60 qnlf sbyybjvat rnpu qngr ba juvpu lbh
     cercner (be ner yrtnyyl erdhverq gb cercner) lbhe crevbqvp gnk
     ergheaf.  Eblnygl cnlzragf fubhyq or pyrneyl znexrq nf fhpu naq
     frag gb gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba ng gur
     nqqerff fcrpvsvrq va Frpgvba 4, "Vasbezngvba nobhg qbangvbaf gb
     gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba."

- Lbh cebivqr n shyy ershaq bs nal zbarl cnvq ol n hfre jub abgvsvrf
     lbh va jevgvat (be ol r-znvy) jvguva 30 qnlf bs erprvcg gung f/ur
     qbrf abg nterr gb gur grezf bs gur shyy Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
     Yvprafr.  Lbh zhfg erdhver fhpu n hfre gb erghea be
     qrfgebl nyy pbcvrf bs gur jbexf cbffrffrq va n culfvpny zrqvhz
     naq qvfpbagvahr nyy hfr bs naq nyy npprff gb bgure pbcvrf bs
     Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbexf.

- Lbh cebivqr, va nppbeqnapr jvgu cnentencu 1.S.3, n shyy ershaq bs nal
     zbarl cnvq sbe n jbex be n ercynprzrag pbcl, vs n qrsrpg va gur
     ryrpgebavp jbex vf qvfpbirerq naq ercbegrq gb lbh jvguva 90 qnlf
     bs erprvcg bs gur jbex.

- Lbh pbzcyl jvgu nyy bgure grezf bs guvf nterrzrag sbe serr
     qvfgevohgvba bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbexf.

1.R.9.  Vs lbh jvfu gb punetr n srr be qvfgevohgr n Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
ryrpgebavp jbex be tebhc bs jbexf ba qvssrerag grezf guna ner frg
sbegu va guvf nterrzrag, lbh zhfg bognva crezvffvba va jevgvat sebz
obgu gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba naq Zvpunry
Uneg, gur bjare bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz genqrznex.  Pbagnpg gur
Sbhaqngvba nf frg sbegu va Frpgvba 3 orybj.

1.S.

1.S.1.  Cebwrpg Thgraoret ibyhagrref naq rzcyblrrf rkcraq pbafvqrenoyr
rssbeg gb vqragvsl, qb pbclevtug erfrnepu ba, genafpevor naq cebbsernq
choyvp qbznva jbexf va perngvat gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
pbyyrpgvba.  Qrfcvgr gurfr rssbegf, Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp
jbexf, naq gur zrqvhz ba juvpu gurl znl or fgberq, znl pbagnva
"Qrsrpgf," fhpu nf, ohg abg yvzvgrq gb, vapbzcyrgr, vanpphengr be
pbeehcg qngn, genafpevcgvba reebef, n pbclevtug be bgure vagryyrpghny
cebcregl vasevatrzrag, n qrsrpgvir be qnzntrq qvfx be bgure zrqvhz, n
pbzchgre ivehf, be pbzchgre pbqrf gung qnzntr be pnaabg or ernq ol
lbhe rdhvczrag.

1.S.2.  YVZVGRQ JNEENAGL, QVFPYNVZRE BS QNZNTRF - Rkprcg sbe gur "Evtug
bs Ercynprzrag be Ershaq" qrfpevorq va cnentencu 1.S.3, gur Cebwrpg
Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba, gur bjare bs gur Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz genqrznex, naq nal bgure cnegl qvfgevohgvat n Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbex haqre guvf nterrzrag, qvfpynvz nyy
yvnovyvgl gb lbh sbe qnzntrf, pbfgf naq rkcrafrf, vapyhqvat yrtny
srrf.  LBH NTERR GUNG LBH UNIR AB ERZRQVRF SBE ARTYVTRAPR, FGEVPG
YVNOVYVGL, OERNPU BS JNEENAGL BE OERNPU BS PBAGENPG RKPRCG GUBFR
CEBIVQRQ VA CNENTENCU S3.  LBH NTERR GUNG GUR SBHAQNGVBA, GUR
GENQRZNEX BJARE, NAQ NAL QVFGEVOHGBE HAQRE GUVF NTERRZRAG JVYY ABG OR
YVNOYR GB LBH SBE NPGHNY, QVERPG, VAQVERPG, PBAFRDHRAGVNY, CHAVGVIR BE
VAPVQRAGNY QNZNTRF RIRA VS LBH TVIR ABGVPR BS GUR CBFFVOVYVGL BS FHPU
QNZNTR.

1.S.3.  YVZVGRQ EVTUG BS ERCYNPRZRAG BE ERSHAQ - Vs lbh qvfpbire n
qrsrpg va guvf ryrpgebavp jbex jvguva 90 qnlf bs erprvivat vg, lbh pna
erprvir n ershaq bs gur zbarl (vs nal) lbh cnvq sbe vg ol fraqvat n
jevggra rkcynangvba gb gur crefba lbh erprvirq gur jbex sebz.  Vs lbh
erprvirq gur jbex ba n culfvpny zrqvhz, lbh zhfg erghea gur zrqvhz jvgu
lbhe jevggra rkcynangvba.  Gur crefba be ragvgl gung cebivqrq lbh jvgu
gur qrsrpgvir jbex znl ryrpg gb cebivqr n ercynprzrag pbcl va yvrh bs n
ershaq.  Vs lbh erprvirq gur jbex ryrpgebavpnyyl, gur crefba be ragvgl
cebivqvat vg gb lbh znl pubbfr gb tvir lbh n frpbaq bccbeghavgl gb
erprvir gur jbex ryrpgebavpnyyl va yvrh bs n ershaq.  Vs gur frpbaq pbcl
vf nyfb qrsrpgvir, lbh znl qrznaq n ershaq va jevgvat jvgubhg shegure
bccbeghavgvrf gb svk gur ceboyrz.

1.S.4.  Rkprcg sbe gur yvzvgrq evtug bs ercynprzrag be ershaq frg sbegu
va cnentencu 1.S.3, guvf jbex vf cebivqrq gb lbh 'NF-VF' JVGU AB BGURE
JNEENAGVRF BS NAL XVAQ, RKCERFF BE VZCYVRQ, VAPYHQVAT OHG ABG YVZVGRQ GB
JNEENAGVRF BS ZREPUNAGVOVYVGL BE SVGARFF SBE NAL CHECBFR.

1.S.5.  Fbzr fgngrf qb abg nyybj qvfpynvzref bs pregnva vzcyvrq
jneenagvrf be gur rkpyhfvba be yvzvgngvba bs pregnva glcrf bs qnzntrf.
Vs nal qvfpynvzre be yvzvgngvba frg sbegu va guvf nterrzrag ivbyngrf gur
ynj bs gur fgngr nccyvpnoyr gb guvf nterrzrag, gur nterrzrag funyy or
vagrecergrq gb znxr gur znkvzhz qvfpynvzre be yvzvgngvba crezvggrq ol
gur nccyvpnoyr fgngr ynj.  Gur vainyvqvgl be harasbeprnovyvgl bs nal
cebivfvba bs guvf nterrzrag funyy abg ibvq gur erznvavat cebivfvbaf.

1.S.6.  VAQRZAVGL - Lbh nterr gb vaqrzavsl naq ubyq gur Sbhaqngvba, gur
genqrznex bjare, nal ntrag be rzcyblrr bs gur Sbhaqngvba, nalbar
cebivqvat pbcvrf bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf va nppbeqnapr
jvgu guvf nterrzrag, naq nal ibyhagrref nffbpvngrq jvgu gur cebqhpgvba,
cebzbgvba naq qvfgevohgvba bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp jbexf,
unezyrff sebz nyy yvnovyvgl, pbfgf naq rkcrafrf, vapyhqvat yrtny srrf,
gung nevfr qverpgyl be vaqverpgyl sebz nal bs gur sbyybjvat juvpu lbh qb
be pnhfr gb bpphe: (n) qvfgevohgvba bs guvf be nal Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
jbex, (o) nygrengvba, zbqvsvpngvba, be nqqvgvbaf be qryrgvbaf gb nal
Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz jbex, naq (p) nal Qrsrpg lbh pnhfr.


Frpgvba  2.  Vasbezngvba nobhg gur Zvffvba bs Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz

Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz vf flabalzbhf jvgu gur serr qvfgevohgvba bs
ryrpgebavp jbexf va sbezngf ernqnoyr ol gur jvqrfg inevrgl bs pbzchgref
vapyhqvat bofbyrgr, byq, zvqqyr-ntrq naq arj pbzchgref.  Vg rkvfgf
orpnhfr bs gur rssbegf bs uhaqerqf bs ibyhagrref naq qbangvbaf sebz
crbcyr va nyy jnyxf bs yvsr.

Ibyhagrref naq svanapvny fhccbeg gb cebivqr ibyhagrref jvgu gur
nffvfgnapr gurl arrq, vf pevgvpny gb ernpuvat Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz'f
tbnyf naq rafhevat gung gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz pbyyrpgvba jvyy
erznva serryl ninvynoyr sbe trarengvbaf gb pbzr.  Va 2001, gur Cebwrpg
Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba jnf perngrq gb cebivqr n frpher
naq creznarag shgher sbe Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz naq shgher trarengvbaf.
Gb yrnea zber nobhg gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba
naq ubj lbhe rssbegf naq qbangvbaf pna uryc, frr Frpgvbaf 3 naq 4
naq gur Sbhaqngvba jro cntr ng uggc://jjj.ctyns.bet.


Frpgvba 3.  Vasbezngvba nobhg gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir
Sbhaqngvba

Gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba vf n aba cebsvg
501(p)(3) rqhpngvbany pbecbengvba betnavmrq haqre gur ynjf bs gur
fgngr bs Zvffvffvccv naq tenagrq gnk rkrzcg fgnghf ol gur Vagreany
Erirahr Freivpr.  Gur Sbhaqngvba'f RVA be srqreny gnk vqragvsvpngvba
ahzore vf 64-6221541.  Vgf 501(p)(3) yrggre vf cbfgrq ng
uggc://ctyns.bet/shaqenvfvat.  Pbagevohgvbaf gb gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret
Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba ner gnk qrqhpgvoyr gb gur shyy rkgrag
crezvggrq ol H.F. srqreny ynjf naq lbhe fgngr'f ynjf.

Gur Sbhaqngvba'f cevapvcny bssvpr vf ybpngrq ng 4557 Zryna Qe. F.
Snveonaxf, NX, 99712., ohg vgf ibyhagrref naq rzcyblrrf ner fpnggrerq
guebhtubhg ahzrebhf ybpngvbaf.  Vgf ohfvarff bssvpr vf ybpngrq ng
809 Abegu 1500 Jrfg, Fnyg Ynxr Pvgl, HG 84116, (801) 596-1887, rznvy
ohfvarff@ctyns.bet.  Rznvy pbagnpg yvaxf naq hc gb qngr pbagnpg
vasbezngvba pna or sbhaq ng gur Sbhaqngvba'f jro fvgr naq bssvpvny
cntr ng uggc://ctyns.bet

Sbe nqqvgvbany pbagnpg vasbezngvba:
     Qe. Tertbel O. Arjol
     Puvrs Rkrphgvir naq Qverpgbe
     toarjol@ctyns.bet


Frpgvba 4.  Vasbezngvba nobhg Qbangvbaf gb gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret
Yvgrenel Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba

Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz qrcraqf hcba naq pnaabg fheivir jvgubhg jvqr
fcernq choyvp fhccbeg naq qbangvbaf gb pneel bhg vgf zvffvba bs
vapernfvat gur ahzore bs choyvp qbznva naq yvprafrq jbexf gung pna or
serryl qvfgevohgrq va znpuvar ernqnoyr sbez npprffvoyr ol gur jvqrfg
neenl bs rdhvczrag vapyhqvat bhgqngrq rdhvczrag.  Znal fznyy qbangvbaf
($1 gb $5,000) ner cnegvphyneyl vzcbegnag gb znvagnvavat gnk rkrzcg
fgnghf jvgu gur VEF.

Gur Sbhaqngvba vf pbzzvggrq gb pbzcylvat jvgu gur ynjf erthyngvat
punevgvrf naq punevgnoyr qbangvbaf va nyy 50 fgngrf bs gur Havgrq
Fgngrf.  Pbzcyvnapr erdhverzragf ner abg havsbez naq vg gnxrf n
pbafvqrenoyr rssbeg, zhpu cncrejbex naq znal srrf gb zrrg naq xrrc hc
jvgu gurfr erdhverzragf.  Jr qb abg fbyvpvg qbangvbaf va ybpngvbaf
jurer jr unir abg erprvirq jevggra pbasvezngvba bs pbzcyvnapr.  Gb
FRAQ QBANGVBAF be qrgrezvar gur fgnghf bs pbzcyvnapr sbe nal
cnegvphyne fgngr ivfvg uggc://ctyns.bet

Juvyr jr pnaabg naq qb abg fbyvpvg pbagevohgvbaf sebz fgngrf jurer jr
unir abg zrg gur fbyvpvgngvba erdhverzragf, jr xabj bs ab cebuvovgvba
ntnvafg npprcgvat hafbyvpvgrq qbangvbaf sebz qbabef va fhpu fgngrf jub
nccebnpu hf jvgu bssref gb qbangr.

Vagreangvbany qbangvbaf ner tengrshyyl npprcgrq, ohg jr pnaabg znxr
nal fgngrzragf pbapreavat gnk gerngzrag bs qbangvbaf erprvirq sebz
bhgfvqr gur Havgrq Fgngrf.  H.F. ynjf nybar fjnzc bhe fznyy fgnss.

Cyrnfr purpx gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Jro cntrf sbe pheerag qbangvba
zrgubqf naq nqqerffrf.  Qbangvbaf ner npprcgrq va n ahzore bs bgure
jnlf vapyhqvat vapyhqvat purpxf, bayvar cnlzragf naq perqvg pneq
qbangvbaf.  Gb qbangr, cyrnfr ivfvg: uggc://ctyns.bet/qbangr


Frpgvba 5.  Trareny Vasbezngvba Nobhg Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz ryrpgebavp
jbexf.

Cebsrffbe Zvpunry F. Uneg vf gur bevtvangbe bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz
pbaprcg bs n yvoenel bs ryrpgebavp jbexf gung pbhyq or serryl funerq
jvgu nalbar.  Sbe guvegl lrnef, ur cebqhprq naq qvfgevohgrq Cebwrpg
Thgraoret-gz rObbxf jvgu bayl n ybbfr argjbex bs ibyhagrre fhccbeg.


Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz rObbxf ner bsgra perngrq sebz frireny cevagrq
rqvgvbaf, nyy bs juvpu ner pbasvezrq nf Choyvp Qbznva va gur H.F.
hayrff n pbclevtug abgvpr vf vapyhqrq.  Guhf, jr qb abg arprffnevyl
xrrc rObbxf va pbzcyvnapr jvgu nal cnegvphyne cncre rqvgvba.


Zbfg crbcyr fgneg ng bhe Jro fvgr juvpu unf gur znva CT frnepu snpvyvgl:

     uggc://jjj.thgraoret.arg

Guvf Jro fvgr vapyhqrf vasbezngvba nobhg Cebwrpg Thgraoret-gz,
vapyhqvat ubj gb znxr qbangvbaf gb gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret Yvgrenel
Nepuvir Sbhaqngvba, ubj gb uryc cebqhpr bhe arj rObbxf, naq ubj gb
fhofpevor gb bhe rznvy arjfyrggre gb urne nobhg arj rObbxf.
